---
date: "2019-05-31"
title: "#100 - College is no longer the destination to learn how to code - the public library is"
ghissue: 79
---

[#100 of 100 Reasons Not To Go To College to Study Computer Science](https://holm.school/new-blog-series/)

I made a listing today of a brief programming curriculum [for everyone who has a Lynda subscription](https://github.com/HolmSchool/lynda-curriculum). Fortunately most everyone who lives near a public library does have access to Lynda, or can drive for half an hour to get a card at a town that does. I recently discovered more and more public libraries are subscribing to Safari Books online, which means patrons will have a huge catalog to almost every O'Reilly and Packt book ever published for their self study. Rather than having to rely on the deadwood CS section stack, patrons can now access a huge digital archive of CS books. Perhaps you even live within range of a public library that subscribes to Treehouse.

In my opinion, anyone interested in learning how to program should enroll at their public library rather than a college. While not perfect, the online curriculums available through your public library rival academia. With hard work and dedication, you can teach yourself to program in employable stacks for free. Spending money to learn to program should order on the hundreds of dollars a year. At most, $1000 a year through UoPeople. Perhaps $200-300 a year for Treehouse or PluralSight. But there are ample study aids at your public library. For someone without any money, there are totally an equivalent amount of video tutorials at your public library to suffice to get you hired somewhere (where you can then take advantage of tuition reimbursement).

I believe that to be the case even without turning to OER or other free online learning. I think your public library, as long as they subscribe to Lynda or Safari Books or Treehouse, is sufficient to learn enough about computer science to pass a job interview. It's no shortcut -- you'll still have to spend many years in deep study. But for someone who views their economic situation such that they can't afford anything superfluous, a public library stack and esubscriptions should be enough to get you your first programming job.

And that obviously means you avoid debt. I think a computer scientist should, upon analyzing the CS EdTech landscape, realize that there are enough free learning resources to negate any need to ever go into debt or spend more than a couple hundred bucks a year. By avoiding debt, especially truly expensive debt like what college tuition is, you'll be able to save at your first programming job while you're young in index funds. Avoiding debt is a great strategy to prevent your youth earnings being siphoned away, so that they can compound in your favor instead of someone else's.

And it's now the case that public libraries cover all their bases related to computer science. Their stack, their Lynda/Safari Books/Treehouse subscriptions provide everyone an opportunity to study programming that rivals university. College is simply too pricey -- why go to university just for a degree when you can spend four years in a public library, learn just as much, and secure a job with zero debt? I think there are enough tutorials to learn an equivalent of college-level CS, and that's not even including [OER](https://github.com/holmschool/holmschool) and OpenCourseWare. That just means, when you include non-public library open source educational resources, that the curriculum is many times redundant equivalent online.

I would not be saying this ten years ago. But recent changes in public library esubscriptions that focus specifically on computer science enable vast new opportunities that change learning to program from being a hobby enabled by the library to being a potential career. When mixed with OER, the opportunity matches if not exceeds a college-level curriculum, because without debt you could possibly keep learning longer than if you were paying tuition, enabling more in-depth mastery of esoteric (but employable) subjects and languages. For anyone serious about self-education surrounding computer science, avoiding debt is the best strategy for enabling advanced study, since you won't have to immediately start working to pay off enormous student loans.

It would be quite advantageous as a society if 18 year old programmers, rather than enrolling at university, lived debt-free and studied using the free resources available from their public library. It's quite a unique accomplishment for many EdTech providers to enable a thorough training in CS online. MIT did it first with OpenCourseWare, then for-profit businesses did it with PluralSight/Treehouse/Lynda/Safari Books. A public library is dedicated to job training, and as such have focused their effort on building their programming educational resources. The for-profit educational resources, available for free for patrons, are a direct competitor to colleges. If your college is affordable, perhaps you choose to combine college and public library into an intense curriculum that all but assures you of a job. But if your college is expensive, by all means you should make use of what's available at your public library to at least get a first job, where with tuition reimbursement perhaps you can earn a few degree credits. But given that, thanks to public libraries, a college-level curriculum is available for free online, it would be foolish to take on debt just because "that's always the way its been done." Trust me, in ten years the public library will be the main location to learn to program, and all that expensive college stuff will be a funny historical note. My hope, of course, is that college become more competitive in their CS pricing, but I highly doubt that will happen.

My guess is, I am probably talking to some high schoolers, middle schoolers, or even elementary school kids with this post. Indeed, there is enough outreach these days that even kids learn to program. I know I was motivated to being programming in sixth grade on an old TRS-80 we had lying around my house, and I imagine many kids today also see the potential benefit in learning how to program. Fortunately, whereas colleges require you to be 18 years old, the resources available from your public library are available at any age. You can learn from your public library whenever you're ready to start! If you study the art of studying computer science, you could even gain something like a college-level equivalent of computer science training in high school. That's what Bill Gates did, and he was able to leave college and focus on his business selling BASIC interpreters. He took graduate level CS classes his freshman year. This is the sort of behavior that results in remarkable work and careers. It's a really good strategy to really rocket past what college offers you, especially if it's free. If you are competent in programming, and have studied CS through OER and OCW, then you could begin a job after completing high school if it is your main hobby. That's why, in my opinion, the public library is going to be THE place to study CS. Because there isn't an age restriction/mandate.

It's unfortunate that colleges no longer serve the interest of the community. They only serve the interest of their administrators who are looking for the largest paycheck. They saddle students with enormous loans, siphoning off millions of dollars in potential earnings from young professionals and compromise people's retirement. The public library lets you train for employment at any age, and leaves you without a single loan. It's really quite a remarkable invention. Things are only going to get better, in my opinion, as more and more affordable CS training companies get founded and are available at prices public libraries can afford. When mixed with free [online curricula](https://github.com/HolmSchool/free-computer-science-curricula) if not something like Library Genesis, the possibility for learning computer science outside of college, and at an ever-earlier age, holds radical potential. My hope is that in ten years Library Genesis will be made redundant and irrelevant, and the online holdings of public libraries surrounding science and programming are so overflowing that the day and age of $50+ programming books and tens of thousand of dollar college tuition loans is laughed at.

I know my public library enabled me to get my first programming job. Having a free Treehouse subscription taught me full stack web development, and I'll probably be working in web for the rest of my life. I recently passed "food FI" in my VTSAX investments after just a few years of working and having a 50%+ savings rate. Up next, rent FI! What a remarkable opportunity my public library has afforded me. I hope anyone, whether or not they can afford college/earn a full ride scholarship to one, can learn about how to study CS at their public library to enable their own career as a programmer debt-free. College is nice, but why pay tens of thousands of dollars (if not hundreds these days) for something that can be learned at your public library mixed with some online OER/OCW curricula. Sure, you might not get the respect deserved from some people, but those people live in the old world instead of the funky and amazing new world. Don't get pressured into going in debt when you know you can learn the equivalent for free online. Hopefully you've even used your public library as a learning resource while in high school, rather than playing video games or something, and can begin work at 18-22! Trust me, it is possible.

Keep following open educational resources and open courseware, and keep up to date with what's available at libraries. Demand for STEM resources is a top priority these days, and as such learning things like programming and CS are going to be prioritized by philanthropic institutes like a public library. Make use of the offerings! By avoiding debt while young, you could retire early or instigate a meaningful philanthropy career. [Good Will Hunting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=azM6xSTT2I0) almost seems like prophecy these days, especially with the Renaissance surrounding the FIRE movement which has amazing potential for programmers. As the student loan crisis swells to record amounts these days, always keep abreast of a free, but just as good alternative: the public library. Now a days, you don't even have to leave the comfort of your home to get a free college education in CS. Don't turn your nose up at what you're being offered. Thank your fortunes you want to be a programmer and become one free!

The day and age of going to college to learn CS is over. While it's still a good option if you can go for free thanks to scholarships or can keep the cost competitively below the $1300 a year [F-You Degree](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree) tuition cost, don't believe that you must be at a college to become a competent programmer. What matters is your drive and initiative now that there is a [library](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books/blob/master/free-programming-books.md) of freely available programming texts -- not to mention Library Genesis  -- plus a ton of video tutorials thanks to Lynda and YouTube. Sometimes I regret not having studied CS when I went to college the first time, but now I realize my public library is a college degree in CS just waiting. I have every opportunity to catch up on what I missed, there's nothing that was available at college that I can't learn (for free) today. Basically I can get two degree (a liberal arts degree and a CS degree) for the price of one! Learning CS for two years at my local university and public library was a much better choice than going to graduate school in the humanities. All of this is possible thanks to the success of open source educational resources in computer science and public library's willingness to cover the gaps by subscribing to private tutorial sites.

I hope you learn to love to read OER, study with OCW, and learn with your public library's Lynda/Treehouse/SafariBooks subscriptions just like I have. My current education budget for my present job is $200 a year, and my job pays for it too. There truly is infinite possibilities for free CS education. The only limit is the amount of time you can dedicate to it per day. Take the time to learn the ropes on Holm School or elsewhere concerning open ed, and use the money saved to buy index funds! I kept my costs below $8000 at my hometown university to enable my first programming job, and today I am confident I could have done the equivalent with just a couple of hundreds of dollars instead, if not zero. If you find yourself with no money to pay for an education in computer science, the public library is where you want to go, not college CS departments!