---
date: "2019-08-15"
title: "#88 - The Conflict of Interest Between Professor and Student"
ghissue: 97
---

Most people who enter academia want to become teachers in a similar institution. The hope is the more prestigious of a university they attend, the more likely they can teach at a prestigious university. My main concern about this tendency is that after attending university, I realize that I would never want to teach at a university because of how expensive it is to people who attend it. I think education should be free (or at least a couple of hundred dollars max a year). The idea of teaching kids is great, but not when those same kids are on the hook for a hundred thousand dollars in loans (as they would be at a private university). This seems like a crappy job, not at all a prestigious job (even if it does come with tenure). It's almost like an MLM scheme, where you're aware that only those at the top make money and all the proles at the bottom hold the bags and are left with all the debt. So, you might say, just work at a public university. The problem with that is that I would still require a prestigious private university degree (one in which I can't at the moment afford, and would never want to pay anyway). The other problem is that even public university students are finding themselves in massive amount of student debt. So even public university, for all its accolades, is still presently too expensive compared with what can be learned affordably online.

I think debt at a young age is extremely detrimental and should avoided at all costs, especially when savings at that age compounds something around 2^5 (using the rule of 72 and a 10% index fund return: 38 years/7.2 = 2^5.27) by the time you retire. So college actually ends up costing you 36 times what its sticker cost is. If you can teach yourself to program online (which you can very well given the amount of OCW/OER/cheap training sites), you can instead EARN those 36 times gains for your retirement instead of sacrificing them. Since I feel that so persuasively, why should I expend my energies pursuing the qualifications to become a university professor? I would be required to work in a profession that is robbing young people of their retirement. I would have to promote going to college instead of warning against it, economics-wise. At this point, I have declared myself something of a "collegial independent," and that is qualified both for as a student and as a professor. Do I really want to rob children of 36 times what they're paying for, when they could be investing that money in VTSAX instead? Heck no, and part of promoting Holm Schooling is promoting personal finance literacy along with OER literacy, so I can't in good faith promote paying a lot of money to go to university when you can teach yourself anything online. I'm not even convinced a $4000 University of the People degree is worth the cost, although that does open some cool doors like the $7000 GATech OMSCS Master's Degree, so I'm willing to promote it as a sane solution to high school costs using OER (the same resources I promote for affordable learning).

Part of the fun of this job is the realization that I will receive zero compensation for my promotion of OER and online learning. There is zero reward for my work. No one is going to pay me to promote going to the most affordable college offer you get, whether that's a local community college or UoPeople. Or whether that's teaching yourself online and only enrolling in university when you're on your company's tuition reimbursement benefit payroll (making a college and master's degree, and your entire education up to that point, free). All of my writing and works are public domain, making compensation for my work very unlikely, for the good of open source. It's pretty cool knowing that I'm not monetizing my blog with ads or recommending credit cards in order to earn a couple hundreds of dollars a month. Holm School is completely public domain, top to bottom. I believe if you are not using open source resources in your computer science education, you are locking yourself into a debtors prison which you can only buy your way out of when it's time to actually do computer science. And the cost to do that is immense, even if you might have the notion that proprietary education is for the good of humanity, etc. It's just a business like any other, and if there are options to use open source it is risky not to use it, since you can never buy yourself out of a proprietary license and it limits your future. Open source is probably going to become more dominant in all aspects of life, because it is a paradigm created for the internet by the internet.

I don't want to promote going to any school that costs more than a $5200 [F-You Degree](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree). If you earn a scholarship that lets you go to a hometown college for less than that, then congratulations, you should definitely do that. But if you didn't, a F-You Degree is a really good option to open doors to the OMSCS masters degree as well as a junior dev job. And you can pay for it for around 3 hours of minimum wage labor a week during the time you're a student, meaning zero debt. All other hours of your life should be dedicated to learning to program as fast as possible. Rather than going to a university which requires electives which, while enlightening, are a waste of time that could be spent learning how to program, and they certainly aren't free (whereas your local public library, which suffices in resources for a liberal arts degree equivalent in reading, is). Skim the fat and only take CS/Math classes if you're paying for public university classes. You can get a job at the end of four years even without a degree and use your tuition reimbursement to finish off the degree online (possibly at UoPeople) after the fact, continuing on with an OMSCS.

I do not want to be a professor at a university, even if I had a PhD. I want to become a professor at Holm School, where tuition is free and the textbooks are free and open source instead of $200. I think this will be the prominent paradigm for affordable education henceforth, offering affordable degrees (a la UoPeople) or otherwise crowd sourcing affordable CS education (a la PluralSight/Treehouse/Lynda/SafariBooks, where costs are amortized over thousands of users to the point that even public libraries can afford subscription fees). In this universe, which is new and quite crazy, placing myself in a traditional bricks and mortar institution would be a tremendous mistake. We're at the point in which volunteer professors suffice for the staff for UoPeople classes, saving costs. We're at the place in which an entire school has decided to use OER, which means students don't have to pay a cent for textbooks from freshman to senior year. We're at a place in which Library Genesis lets anyone read the same textbooks used at private universities for free, anywhere in the world. You don't need a physical stack anymore. We're at a world in which an entire training series in various programming languages are just $25 a month at Treehouse, or even free if your public library subscribes to them as mine does. You can get a job doing web development for zero expense at your public library. Lynda comes pretty close if you don't have Treehouse (and most people have Lynda). Mix that with a liberal study of OpenCourseWare and OER to make sure you get the computer science/algorithms fundamentals rather than just programming training and you have everything needed to get a job with zero educational costs.

I would be crazy to go into a job in academia at this point. It's been open sourced and put online for free. I obviously would get a better salary in academia, but is that guaranteed considering how much of a bubble it is? When the student debt crisis crashes the economy once the bubble bursts, is all the work and debt for getting an academy job really going to be a good job continuing forward? Or would that be promoting the wrong thing, focusing on the wrong solutions for an extensive problem, writing myself out of the future? That's my belief, and one of the reasons I'm working on Holm School in my free time rather than getting the degrees necessary to become a professor. I hope my side hustle pays off in terms of influence rather than monetization, because I think many people aren't aware that you can boostrap a great career in CS for very low costs (even if the amount of work is immense -- which is good). This isn't true in all STEM fields, just computer science, but people need to know they don't need to take out non-bankruptable student loans to learn CS. Considering most CS jobs pay tuition reimbursement, it might be more strategic to study online for free towards a first job, then focus on earning your degrees while working. With UoPeople and OMSCS, this is possible.

Considering UoPeople professors are volunteer, I don't feel bad never earning anything from Holm School. Rather than teaching at UoPeople, I teach at Holm School towards the same cause -- affordable education in computer science by using and creating OER. Though I don't make any money, it's great knowing no one is going into debt in order to learn here. I hope to contribute to OER and continue and promote the legacy of all the authors that have [open sourced their CS textbooks](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books/blob/master/free-programming-books.md). Computer science is unique in the world of STEM in that it does not require any labs or equipment other than a Raspberry Pi to learn. I wish that were true of other STEM disciplines, and while we've made progress towards that thanks to Library Genesis, at the moment there doesn't seem to be much hope of becoming a professional scientist in any of the other STEM departments without a university education. But that doesn't apply to CS, in which university-equivalent training is open source and online, and we should exploit that unique situation as much as we can and avoid student loans seeing as they are apparently unnecessary. Considering how important I consider personal finance to computer scientists, I am not at all interesting in entering a workforce that compromises CS students' personal finance at an early age by saddling them with student loans. If Holm Schooling can get a person a job with very low up front costs, then I am comfortable not earning a penny from their misunderstandings about CS education. I'm not looking to exploit anyone, especially young innocent kids who just want to be computer scientists, as I have since seventh grade. I wasn't looking to go $70,000 in debt at age 23 for this dream, I am only now recuperating that cost at age 34. This old and expensive way of doing things needs to be replaced, and now with Library Genesis and other EdTech, not to mention your public library, it is finally possible. So I am promoting what I know concerning this with Holm School. The most important factor in your education concerning CS is time, not prestige, and you can have more time to study CS if you keep costs low (talking hundreds of dollars a year) so that you aren't obligated to find work to pay off your loans. Imagine getting a F-You Degree ($5200), followed by an OMSCS degree ($7000). After basically 6-7 years of study and earning yourself a master's degree, you're only $13,000 in debt. $13,000 over 7 years is roughly $1,742 a year, or basically 5 hours of minimum wage work a week to cover the cost. That's minimal time commitment for a student and very doable, meaning you could get a master's degree in CS with zero debt at the end. That's immense and practically impossible at a brick and mortar university. It's a wild time to be alive if you're an 18 year old who wants to be a computer scientist. Graduating with a Master's degree for zero debt is a wonderful opportunity. My undergraduate could have funded 6 F-You + OMSCS degrees. That's food for thought. The old way of doing things is something I want no part in, even as a paid professor, especially as I consider myself getting burned from the old way as a student, rather than flourishing because of it.

There is a terminal conflict of interest between the professor and the student. This is similar to the conflict of interest between a financial advisor and a client. Do they operate on commission? Are they a fiduciary? Are they able to give financial advice in the client's best interest when they themselves are looking to profit the most? As Jim Collins says, that requires a certain saintly person. I think those saintly people are found in the people who volunteer as profs for UoPeople. I also think the conflict of interest extends to professors, who in a way are basically financial advisors regarding education. They hope to make the most money off their knowledge, and part of having that edge is having the client have as little knowledge as possible so that they can maintain their necessity. Having the edge seems to be a good thing, but part of that "edge" requires teaching a lot from lecture, and lectures are ultimately recordable and able to be put on YouTube. In a way, the very edge that suggests you should pay a lot of money requires that the tutelage be oral through lectures, which immediately means in this day and age anyone can capture it with an iphone and put it on YouTube for anyone else to view for free. That's sort of thing you see with financial independence blogs, in which JLCollinsNH puts his [Stock Series](https://jlcollins.nh.com/stock-series) online for free for anyone to read, and that sort of five hours of study trumps the investing advice financial advisors can give. If an advisor doesn't recommend index funds, you should probably run away. And likewise, if a professor doesn't recommend dropping out of college if it is expensive and studying on your own through OER/OCW/LibGen, then you should probably run away. There is a huge conflict of interest between new technology and the old technology that drives investment of time and money in brick and mortar colleges.

How far should this conflict of interest be analysed? Well personally I don't think it's very reasonable to assume that students should be on the hook for funding an entire professor's salary when they are one of a hundred or so students that take their classes in a semester. That's a tremendous burden financially. We need redundancy through technology that permits a wide pool of students who aren't necessarily tied to in-person interactions that can source their tuition together in order to pay for the one professor's salary. That's the sort of thing we see in OpenCourseWare, where a professor's salary to create OCW can be paid through YouTube advertisements or perhaps through donations. It's also what PluralSight does, in that thousands of people pay for PS whereas only a few "professors" create content, allowing for affordability for the student but teachers can actually earn a lot due to the technological redudancy (Scott Allen earns a million dollars a year being a PS teacher).

Professors who promote the bricks and mortar, 25 student classes are a conflict of interest to modern students. A professor should be finding ways to digitize their content and put it on the internet for millions of people to consume. Those millions of people can then pay the professor's salary through small tuition fees (PluralSight) or else even watching ads (YouTube OCW). If you are paying a professor for in-person tutelage, you might want to consider paying a professor instead who creates Open Source Course Ware. That will be much smaller in cost if you find a way to pool together many people who are interested in that content around the world. It also keeps with the "DRY" (Dont Repeat Yourself) principle in that you don't need thousands of professors teaching the same thing repeatedly in person, you can find one person to teach it online through video (or textbook) who open sources it. That's the idea behind Khan Academy and high school/intro college course material. That's what you find in OpenCourseWare too. That's why I think focusing Holm School around aggregating open source video and texts is a way to escape that conflict of interest and create content for people learning open source without requiring a professor's salary. I can do this for free after work. I don't require subscriptions, god forbid. That's the magic of open source and the way, I promise you, people will teach themselves to program in ten years. I'm trying to build the infrastructure that allows for this completely free education to flourish in regards to computer science. The traditional bricks and mortar model simply doesn't work for lowering prices, and that's why the old way is a conflict of interest, since people involved try to sap as much money from naive students, just like non-fiduciary investment advisors try and do with commission-based recommendations.

If there was an organization that granted "fiduciary" status to EdTech, I'd be enrolled. I don't think that exists, but the standard that might suffice is whether the EdTech is open source or not. There's a lot to be said for using open source licensing in creating educational resources, and the influence of this (at the moment) niche domain is really going to expand in the oncoming years. Public libraries can help, since they offer resources like Lynda free for patrons, and sites like Holm School can aggregate more open-sourced-focused operations hidden on various corners of the internet. At the moment I am able to run everything I want to do with regards to Holm School for free on Github, so I don't need to ask for any donations. That keeps my conflict of interest low -- all the edtech I promote is free or infinitely more affordable than college. As a wannabe fiduciary, I only promote edtech that I see as in the client's best interest and I certainly don't receive any compensation for Holm School from companies. Holm School is fiduciary, though I'm not certified by any body. Just my humble motive.

If I were a financial advisor, I would suggest my clients read JLCollinsNH's "Simple Path to Wealth" and control their Vanguard account themselves. If I were a professor, I would suggest to my students they read OCW/OER if they are paying more than a couple hundred bucks a year for college, and control their student debt themselves by avoiding it completely and investing the difference in Vanguard. I probably wouldn't last long in either position, but I don't need to worry about it because that's the sort of job shift you're seeing thanks to open source technology. It's kind of like automation: financial advisors and professors have been automated thanks to the ease of creating digital open source educational content (or setting up an account in Vanguard, etc). That's what having a fiduciary role means: you put the client's best interest in all circumstances. College is great if it is free or the [lowest cost possible out of all your options](https://holm.school/90-the-barebone-baseline-degree-manifesto/), but anything beyond the barebone baseline risks leaving you with debt at an age you should be socking money into your 401k and IRA's index funds at your first junior dev job. Do professors act as fiduciary? I'm not trying to smear them, by any means, but you do have to admit there is a conflict of interest between earning as high of salary as possible off of student's continued participation in your curricula, and trying to do at little harm to the student as possible. The convincing of students to remain in college for years, paying high tuition in an attempt to earn a little more job security as long as the students keep enrolling and believing the hype. The best option to avoid this conflict of interest is to have an endowment that pays for all the costs of the college (obviously an online one), and have the students pay only as much as possible to meet the supply of (online) professors. This is probably going to happen through UoPeople someday, if more philanthropists get involved and pump up the endowment. At least it lends itself to scaling well, since it uses open source technology and makes its curricula using OER. That's also what you see with OpenCourseWare, in which MIT's endowment allows them to produce OCW on YouTube and eating the cost for the social benefit. Endowments, when harnessed towards open source ends, can indeed be powerful. That's assuredly what we'll see out of OpenStax as they pay professors to produce more open source textbooks too using their endowment.

Meditate over the potential conflict of interest between professor and student. Is having a non-bankruptable student loan between the two of you a situation in your best interest? Or is it a bit of a golden handcuff? Can a professor lead you on a professional track that benefits from early job placements, versus a track that encourages many years of non-working, focusing on academic studying at the expense of not earning a salary? Does a professor really want you to avoid going into debt, when that debt pays their salary? Find a way to break that conflict of interest. I hope Holm School can help you in a fiduciary way to avoid the downsides of the non-fiduciary role of college staff. Be wise and become "OER-literate," just like learning about financial independence, so you aren't losing out on thousands of dollars in advisor fees and expense ratios (so to speak).

















