---
date: "2019-08-13"
title: "#89 - Supply and Demand are Reversed for College Degree Prices"
ghissue: 89
---

I have a pet theory that supply and demand are reversed when it comes to the pricing of a degree. Because some degrees are by all accounts valueless (anyone can read the set of books on the curriculum for free at their public library or on LibGen, and I'm particularly thinking of the liberal sciences), something must be driving the absurd cost of these degrees, such that people are going into debt in order to obtain valueless degrees. It works this way: As degrees become worthless in the marketplace due to political issues and wasted resources, the degree costs actually rise because the universities realize that only desperate people want these sort of liberal arts degrees. Since it's valueless, and people still want them, there is less obligation to lower the price because demand is so low.

I test this out by proposing the example of UoPeople. A computer science degree is so valuable that you can basically get away with paying very little because it's not a waste of time. Since it's not a waste of time, there isn't a high price attached to it. So many people have committed their time to making computer science educations affordable that the glut corresponds to barebone prices. Since no one makes any effort to, say, make a sociology education affordable, there is no effort to make sociology degrees affordable. No one has any money in sociology to create OER because no one makes enough money to contribute to charity. No to mention that demand is so low for jobs that sociologists don't want to promote people earning sociology degrees, as that would actually create competition for their potential future jobs.

I think the more valuable a degree is to a person and to society, the more affordable it will be. That's a bit of a reversal of supply and demand, but that's ultimately the effect that open source has on software: the greater the demand, the more likely it is to be open sourced. People can't get away with charging high prices for a good/degree when there is an open source alternative. There are no open source educations for liberal arts degrees, the whole gamut is proprietary and copyrighted and obscured behind digital paywalls. People don't contribute liberal arts books to Library Genesis. Liberal arts books are expensive, and there's no "Safari Books" for sociology. It's a losing proposition, the effort behind OER fades because the field becomes irrelevant and unnecessary ultraleft, and the cost to learn the curriculum goes up in price because demand is so low for anyone in the know.

In education, supply and demand can sort of pinpoint you in what you should pursue. Considering UoPeople started out offering a computer science degree, there is a good chance computer science is the most opportune major to choose. Though people think paying a couple thousand dollars for a degree from UoPeople shows how crappy of a school it is, I actually think what is demonstrates is how robust high-demand fields are in creating a world of affordable education. Especially when that world consists of people going a hundred thousand dollars in debt for a sociology degree. If you're education isn't affordable, the chances are you aren't going to have much luck finding a job in that field. High price for college degrees aren't proof that the field has a robust future, it actually signals its encroaching death. Just like private universities bit into your savings at a young age that could be put into index funds if you had saved money and went to community college, the cost to the person is so enormous that demand for the degree plummets. People basically begin to pay for the degree, because so few people will pay them to study it. No one teaches affordable education in the field because no one is financially secure enough to produce OER. No universities can create affordable online degrees, a la UoPeople, because public schools aren't "good enough" for the few jobs there are in the field, so people are basically forced to "purchase" their future job by paying a lot for a private university degree. It's a bad spiral, and one of the reasons I'm not surprised college costs so much. People getting valueless degrees because they don't want to study STEM but still want to go to college when the public library would suffice for their job training basically creates an unsustainable feedback loop. And part of unsustainability is non-market driven supply and demand curves. It's 100% bubble.

The bubble of the liberal arts is demonstrated in the way that you can get a [F-You Degree](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree) for $5200 but you would have to pay 12 times that for a silly art history degree. If you choose to pay $70,000 for a liberal arts degree when you could have got a STEM degree for $5200, you are basically buying into a bubble. The bubble is the broken supply-demand curve, where the low demand for liberal arts majors causes the price of a liberal arts degree to soar. The bubble is that even though private universities strip you of your potential savings at age 22 when you graduate, costing you millions of dollars in opportunity cost when compounded for 40 years at 10% earnings, people still will go to private university instead of community college. The way people are throwing away millions of dollars chasing broken supply-demand curves just because of the perceived prestige of the product is the perfect definition of a bubble. The bubble is going to burst and if you're not able to program in the 21st century, the question will be what were you studying at age 18-22 instead? Even liberal arts majors need to learn how to program, and that's why I believe if you want to be a liberal arts major, a computer science degree is a great degree and training for a liberal arts job. A computer scientist can get a liberal arts job any day of the week, but a liberal arts major can't get a computer science job. And most jobs in the future will be computer science jobs.

If you are paying a lot for a degree, it's worth considering if you aren't buying into a bubble. Any potential earning gains by having a private college degree will be offset by the debt you are left to pay at the end of your tenure at college, resulting in something like a million dollars of opportunity cost. The benefits of a bubble are very small, and it's best to abscond from their presence rather than running towards them. If you resist teaching yourself CS through OER, F-You Degrees, and your public library, then you are not on the reverse supply-demand curve for educational costs that say the increased demand for a degree results in lower prices. If you fail to heed that the curve is reversed in education, then you are blissfully unaware that you are walking headfirst into a bubble. When the bubble bursts, you're left holding the bags with a degree you could have gotten for $4000 bucks.

When it comes to college costs, the more in-demand your degree is, the closer to free it will be. In computer science's case, the affordability comes down to community colleges/public unversities, which will still get you jobs, or even UoPeople if you don't have a college in your hometown, or even just OER/public library/LibGen if you don't even want to pay for UoPeople. The job is so in-demand, you'll still get a job as long as you put four years of hard work into it, no matter what the final pricetag. The less debt you have, the more you can start maxing out your 401k and IRA in index funds at age 22, setting you up to become financially independent.