---
date: "2019-08-04"
title: "#90 - The Barebone Baseline Degree Manifesto"
ghissue: 94
---

[#90 of 100 Reasons Not To Go To College to Study Computer Science](https://holm.school/new-blog-series/)


There must be a baseline for people considering going to college. That baseline must be the most affordable means of earning a computer science degree in America. At the current moment, that is the $4000 OER-based University of the People degree.

I hope eventually this baseline will go even lower. Perhaps more nonprofits will fine even more ways of competing with UoPeople's price tag. I am skeptical, however. I don't see many more modifications possible to trim any fat from UoPeople. It's quite elegant in its current form, and one reason I'm a big fan.

However, there has to be a real world change due to the innovation of UoPeople. Students must refuse to pay more than $4000 for a degree, regardless of the "prestige" of the university. If any university will wind up costing more than $4000, then the student must choose UoPeople over it. You might think I'm crazy for proposing this, but I believe it to be a central tenant of Holm Schooling. Don't pay more than $4000 for a CS degree.

Of course, that means you basically have to get a full ride to a public university in your hometown. I see no reason to view this as a downside. I think the sort of work ethic that earns you a full ride scholarship to a local public university is the same type of work ethic that creates future important computer scientists. You might say I'm being resistant to easy mistakes and foibles made but young students, but I would respond by saying there is a perfect solution for students that fall into such a camp: University of the People for $4000.

College should be free for anyone who works hard enough in college. That free can be gradiated to being either private university for the really hard workers, public university for the less hard workers, and community college for the other students. I think this is a reasonable expectation, because I think going into debt to study computer science when you can do it so easily and productively online for free is personal finance suicide. Debt when you're young costs something like 32 times what the sticker price is when you're sacrificing investing in index funds at a young age. Writing yourself out of compounding interest earned while young is committing yourself to a lot more hard work than anyone should ever have to face. Unfortunately most kids today are not disgusted by high tuition costs, they instead view it as proof of the quality of a prestigious degree. That is false and simply not true.

Computer Science doesn't care if you have a prestigious degree. There is nothing that will close doors due to having a lack of an expensive degree if you can do the required work. It is very easy to demonstrate ability in computer science, it's completely transparent (github) and just takes the little effort of making a portfolio website. If you can't make a portfolio website, you probably aren't skilled enough to be a computer scientist. I am not being elitist in saying that, I am suggesting that kids stop worrying about what elite school they get into and focus instead of teaching themselves how to program affordably through OER/OCW/public libraries.

It used to be that a public university would cost $4000 total (even considering inflation). That's no longer the case, and the only way costs will come down is if students refuse to pay more than the cost of the cheapest CS degree in America. The brilliance of UoPeople is that it is entirely scalable due to ability -- anyone can breeze through the required reading then hit it harder on more and more OER thanks to github repos like [EbookFoundation](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books/blob/master/free-programming-books.md) (not including Library Genesis or your local public library). The sky is the limit because we are now at the point in which even a graduate level education in computer science is available online. In that way, you are no longer obligated to pay for facilities like a library. That sort of stuff has "melted into the air" of github and LibGen. That's just a fact of modernity. It is not particularly productive to deny it or resist it in any particular way. It new, and a little paradigm shifting, but it's ultimately "good" and probably going to improve your life if you embrace it.

I believe in competitivity, and I believe that university costs should always be competitive to what is the most accessible and affordable option. The degree of "prestige" associated with the school holds zero competivity in a meritocratic realm such as computer science. Competitivity should be evaluated at a financial level, not a social stigma level. I don't believe in stigma for using OER (it doesn't matter if you learn to program through a free OER or a $200 textbook as long as you can do what is required of you as a programmer). I don't believe that the stigma against not having a prestigious degree will prevent you from having a successful career, especially in such an in-demand field as computer science. I think what is unfortunate is risking having a very low net worth just because you paid a lot of money for a degree. I think frugality will be less stigmatized as this generation fails to prepare for their retirement, and the math starts showing itself to the public.

Colleges try to make it seem like you'll make a lot of money getting a degree from them. I don't remember this exactly, but I know my expectation for earning a degree from a private university was that I would easily pull down $100,000 a year as a professional. That wasn't at all my case, and I was applying to Chipotle at thirty instead of having a well paying job. College prestige is 100% marketing, which plays off social fears and prejudices by young but competitive people. There was nothing I learned at my college that I couldn't have learned at my public library, and that was even before the invention of Library Genesis. While I am referencing a liberal arts degree in this paragraph, the same is true for computer science degrees. What is most important is that you're committed to working hard and learning CS fundamentals instead of chasing after the promise of higher salaries that elite colleges make you believe you will earn in exchange for their outrageous pricetags. Since most learning is self-directed, the return on your investment is in your hands, not the university. For a fraction of the cost, you can transfer than investment in yourself with a UoPeople degree, and still come out with the same skill set.

Competition should come not from the prestige of the college you get into, but by the affordability of the university you attend. Shifting that focus will reward you by ensuring that you can become financially independent as soon as possible, instead of becoming as prestigious as soon as possible. Prestige is a false hope, and if you buy into its dominant narrative that pervades America, you are sacrificing financial independence. FI comes from being competitive in frugality and hard work, not from buying your way to supposed success. In that way, I don't think anyone should pay more than $4000 for a CS degree.

The nice thing about $4000 is that you can pay for it working roughly three hours a week at minimum wage for four years, and you can graduate debt free. Not having to work will allow you more time to study, which will grant you more access to the type of advanced topics that are expected of successful computer scientists. It's a win-win situation: You stand to become financially independent sooner, and you also have more time to become a competent computer scientist. The belief that you need a prestigious degree to become a competent computer scientist disintegrates at the simple searching of any elite university's syllabus's required reading on Library Genesis. It's no longer a matter of access, it's a matter of personal drive (aided by greater free time not being in debt at any point in your life).

Not being in debt at any point in your life is the ultimate "unlocked achievement" in the game of life, because it lets you buy your freedom. Buying your freedom is so much more important than buying your prestige, that I created this site to try and convince you of it. Maxing out your 401k and IRA while you're young is the ticket to freedom, and this typically can only be done with frugality and zero debt. Public library, both bricks & mortar and digital, help you achieve that freedom.

I'm willing to be a little harsh and be blunt here: Paying more than $4000 for a CS degree is stupid in the day and age of UoPeople. You may scoff initially and say that's ridiculous, but I suggest you watch a few documentaries and books on open source software. Just like open source is eating software, open source education is eating universities. The day and age of student debt is over, now you can pay for a university degree in computer science for a few hours of minimum wage work a week while you're studying. That's quite remarkable, and one reason I hope philanthropists will sweeten the pot even more and sponsor UoPeople scholarships ([F-You Degrees](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree)) through local public libraries for just a couple million dollars per town. People will say value over price tag, but since education is so self-directed anyway to make it almost not even a product, sometimes price tag wins when mixed with commitment and hard work. It's stupid to pay more than $4000 for a CS degree in 2019.

If you win scholarships that makes a brick and mortar university cheaper than $4000, then by all means take it and go and work your affordable little butt off. If you missed the boat (which requires almost military precision to accomplish from a very young age), you're better off going with the most affordable school that isn't a scam or degree mill. I hope that you take the opportunity that four years of debt-free time affords you and study YOUR little affordable butt off. Computer science is a great field to work in, particularly because open source has little tolerance for prestige when meritocracy is on the line. Good software needs good developers, and fortunately becoming a good developer doesn't require much more than zero dollars in 2019.

The Barebone Baseline Degree Manifesto says you should always go with the most affordable university option. If you can't even afford $4000, fortunately you can just rely on OER/OCW and your local public library. The notion that good things only come from high price tags needs to die in a fire. As Holm Schoolers we are aware that open source has created an entire field of open education, and the energy and momentum behind it has matched if not surpassed traditional bricks and mortar education. Prestigious degrees are only worth it if they cost less than the Barebone Baseline Degree. Fortunately, that baseline is only $4000. You should celebrate for the future of humanity. No longer will an entire generation be swarmed with tens of thousands of dollars of student loans at a young age, and they instead can invest in index funds with their zero debt. Computer science makes a $4000 degree possible, and computer science will continue to enhance the lives of computer scientists willing to research a bit more behind high expenses, bubbles, and consumer debt in all forms.

I think if you have the ability to work a couple more hours a week while you're studying, you can find success with a [F-You degree](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree). I think sacrificing much more than this is a folly. Believe me when I say if you believe the prestige bait, you will get hooked and put on the line for an immense debt that prevents you from gaining financial independence. With greater knowledge about financial independence through free and open dialogue on contemporary FI blogs and OER, we're finally finding solutions to problems that plagued an entire generation oblivious to the bubble in higher education. Bubbles pop, and that popping is the realization that the bait wasn't a real minnow but a faux worm that results in your fast-impending financial debt. It's unfortunate that the culprit is a government institution like public universities, but the buyer must be aware of bubbles and avoid them at all cost. Talking about bubbles and creating educational curricula on bubbles (as I hope Holm School will do) is a great solution to rising bubbles. Experiment with solutions proposed by FI bloggers (particularly computer scientists, which a majority of them are) and find a way to dodge the tempting bait and recognize it as a hook instead of sustenance. Trying to fly past the Barebone Baseline Degree and score more worms is playing with fire. Keep it baseline, and avoid the bubble. It will cause better solutions to the bubble to be invented, as UoPeople has done and will probably continue to do for the near future. The only other solution which requires zero debt at all is [Library Genesis](https://holm.school/91-library-genesis). Soon that will be reified through a legal Spotify for Books, and that invention will cause the bubble to lose its appeal to naive young children.

I'm not a fan of institutions that profit off the naivity of children. I grew up a PBS kid and I never saw the value of treating kids in a way that deviates from Mr. Rogers. Colleges act like degenerate forms of Mr. Rogers, promising drunken revelries and a libertarian party scenes with no legal threat for the participant. Instead of serving as the role of Mr. Rogers, public universities serve in the role of the Cool Uncle who owns a strip club. That needs to stop, and responsibility needs to be taken by students not to be enticed into self-harming activity, all for a cheap attempt at saying F-You to [strict parents](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hRVOOwFNp5U). I'm not surprised that the sort of degeneracy that sees the replacement of a person like Barack Obama with Donald Trump comes at the tail end of a college debt bubble, with an entire generation scrambling to party hard along the way of earning a valueless liberal arts degree bought for a few tens of thousands of dollars of "tuition fees." It's sloppy and bad work, and should never be condoned. Instead of recognizing their misfortune coming from the lackadaisical morals of the Cool Uncle versus Mr. Rogers, they instead elect the Cool Uncle to the presidency. Hmm, okay, seems irresponsible but irresponsibility is the direct result of choosing to act irresponsible. Put aside the drugs and alcohol and study computer science and don't crash the entire economy through your Hopium in the value of a prestigious degree. That value is nonexistent, and we're facing the consequences of that Hopium in the form of populists like Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders. Shit hits the fan when colleges are no longer tied to common inflation rates, but tied to the ease at which you can pay for protection from criminality for party scenes and psychoactives abuse. Fuck the Police indeed, deadhead. I mean future high salaried professional, lolsob. How could a bubble and populism ever arise from this system of economic reward??! I'm perplexed, by golly!

Best of luck to you regardless of if you take my advice or not. My advice here at Holm School: be frugal even in regards to education, be a vegan straightedger, and invest in index funds. Let's see what we can accomplish if we do this as a community.

