---
date: "2019-06-25"
title: "#92 - Literacy is More Important than Conferences"
ghissue: 91
---

[#92 of 100 Reasons Not To Go To College to Study Computer Science](https://holm.school/new-blog-series/)

College conferences are pretty cool. It's a good way to get to know people and focus your friendship around academic pursuits. But the problem is that conference time costs tens of thousands of dollars a year, whereas reading ebook on your computer is a potentially free activity. Unfortunately for the student who is on the hook with nonbankruptable college loans, literacy is more important than conference experience.

That's one of the central premises behind why I'm throwing up a free OER curriculum that overloads the student with book readings at the sacrifice of (obviously) paying for a professor to lead a conference-style class. Conference is important, almost an essential part of the college experience, proponents of colleges will say. Online learning results in a stunted student with no speaking skills or critical thinking capacity. But is this true? Fortunately, I don't believe that to be the case. And that's why Holm School created a computer science curriculum that is dominant with reading OER (with a few OpenCourseWare classes). I believe computer science literacy trumps conference literacy. I think the real benefit of college is the time you spend in the library reading books off the wonderful stacks at college libraries. Time spent reading is much more valuable than conference time. That's why colleges are successful employment preparation, they train their students to spend as much time as possible reading books. Reading books is like compounding interest -- it's your friend and ally. But is conference time an ally? Probably not, and you can see that in the fact that there are no open source computer science conference technologies.

While there are many OER books concerning computer science -- and anything not open source is available on Library Genesis -- there seems to be no open source computer science class conferences. People might blame this on insufficient technology, but I highly doubt that. The technology is there, but it has been jettisoned by the OER community in exchange for focusing on open source books and textbooks. This aligns with my experience that time clocked reading books is more important than time clocked in conference. Conference time is non-digitizable, it's not able to be recreated for free on the internet. This is not a benefit, as college marketers and admissions office try to paint it as. It means that there is an outmoding of conference in the realm of open source versus the explosion of open source books. There are vast libraries of computer science texts available free through [EbookFoundation](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books), but there are no vast libraries of computer science socratic seminars. You might scoff and say that's dumb, but not in my opinion. That's because, in my experience, conference in reality just serves as an opportunity for students to demonstrate to the professor that they did the reading and are deserving of a good grade. There is not much critical thought involved. The conference exists only for the benefit of the professor who is tasked with determining grades, so they continually ping the conference to see who is doing their reading or not. When you unschool computer science, you aren't dependent on grades because all your professors are digital archives, so you don't need a conference at all. Conference isn't digitizable because grades aren't digitizable. You need a person, an interlocutor, to assign grades. Avoid that phenomenon and you avoid the overhead of traditional college, versus the radical potential of teaching yourself computer science free online using OER and your public library.

So part of the prerequisite of success unschooling is having access to a ton of books, which through sheer number can make up for any deficiency of not having conference time. Reading is much more valuable than conference, so if you spend all your time reading books on computer science, you're going to be a competent computer scientist. The real value of conference for a student is that through professorial intervention of determining grades based on conference participation, students are forced to do some heavy reading. If you are self motivated and can induce yourself to read every second of free time you have, you are going to be successful as a computer science student. The problem that existed before was that there were no extensive digital libraries, so not having access to a college library greatly inhibited the number of books you could read in your free time. That is no longer the case, with extensive OER libraries as well as services like Archive.org and Library Genesis. Now nearly every book is available for reading. The opportunities aren't limited based on availability, but now merely time. You can read every book on college computer science syllabi thanks to Library Genesis on your ipad at home. You can read any book you think would be an ancillary benefit to your education too, without having to be reliant on a college library stack. That's a remarkable change to education, and now it makes more sense to read as many important books as possible at home for free instead of going tens of thousands if not hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt with that opportunity of access to a vast library only offered at brick and mortar universities. Once a digital archive of a college library is available for free online for anyone, as Library Genesis does, the need to go to college is removed.

So I believe OER is a precious present gifted to people willing to read as much as humanly possible in four years. Books are much better at conveying information and learning than conferences ever are, and so having access to a vast library of computer science texts for free is basically making college free. Since most students haven't had four years of their time free for self-directed learning during their youth, they don't recognize the utility of open ed and Library Genesis. Whereas people might argue that Library Genesis is destroying author profits, I don't believe that to be the case. No one who goes to college ever buys the books that they read from their library stacks anyway. They check it out for free at the circ desk. The colleges are the ones making money off the criticalness of books, they are a sort of lamprey that earns their food at the cost of book authors, who don't get paid any more than a dollar when a college library purchases their book. That maybe translates to a few hundred dollars at the various college libraries around the nation. When Library Genesis serves as a college library with a student body of everybody, they don't affect the author's bottomline but instead remove the need to pay for college to access books. This is a big boon to humanity, because instead of doing into debt when they're young, student can take the money they save self educating for free and put that into index funds, which translates to hundreds of thousands of dollars by the time they retire.

Instead of charging big bucks for tuition from their students, Library Genesis just charges the inconvenience of having to look at an ad. That's because their costs, which are very low thanks to open source server technology and affordable internet, are covered enough just by a couple ads. If you ask me if I view a free college education that is covered by ad revenue illegal, I would call you crazy and insist that this college be seen as a real phenomenon thanks to the internet that is deserving of praise and admiration. It is a mix of entrepreneurship, philanthropy, and forward thinking regarding modern education practices. This entrepreneurial mindset has taken college costs and simplified them by trimming the fat (the football stadiums, the land cost, utilities, the rock walls and lazy pools) and simply offering the most critical aspect of education for free: books. This is not a crime to be a student of Library Genesis. It is a model of college that, admittedly, is non traditional, but paying your tuition through just a few ads per week is possible thanks to technology. I never paid for using the books available at my college library either. My tuition went to maintaining the utilities required by maintaining a physical library, but digitize the collection and servers offering the same service costs mere pennies per student. This is not illegal, this is not criminal, this is what being a student in 2019 is. To think that avoiding tuition worth tens of thousands of dollars is deserving of criticism isn't applying critical thinking skills.

So college books are digitized while college conferences aren't. That's not surprising to anyone who has experienced the marginal utility of conference time. The conference only benefits the professor due to making their assignment of grades for each student easier. Cut the grades, the non-digital-archived professor, and the bricks and mortar and electrical costs, and the conference and a college education is paid for through ad revenue. That's the reality of Library Genesis and OER, and that's why going into debt to earn a computer science degree is equivalent to punching yourself in the face. If you are a reader, which most successful scientists are, then you'll be fine teaching yourself computer science through books and getting a job instead of relying on a degree to do the heavy lifting for you. Go through the work of reading a college-equivalent curriculum using free ebooks for four years, if not using the extra free time and money you have not paying for college to read above and beyond the number of books usually read by a computer science student, and you'll definitely find yourself skilled enough to find a job. Then you can pay for a college degree using tuition reimbursement through your employer's benefits instead of footing the cost yourself. You wind up at the same place with a maxed-out IRA and 401k, invested in index funds, for many years at age 22, instead of non-bankruptable student debt and zero savings at the time when your savings net you [32-times-the-amount-saved growth effortlessly](https://holm.school/secrets-compounding-interest/).

Books are more efficacious education transmitters than conference ever will be. That's why open source education proponents have focused on OER instead of open source class conferences. If that weren't the case, then you can be guaranteed we'd have open source class conferences. The need for inexpensive education is vast, because saddling people who are self motivated enough to go to college with immense debt is basically ruining America. Now that books, both OER and non, are available for free on the internet through digital public libraries, paid for through inconspicuous ads or donations, the need to pay for college is absolutely gone. The quasi-utopia that comes from inexpensive books is a promise made hundreds if not thousands of years ago fulfilled. Though publishers will always view public libraries as a threat, fortunately publishers are not the government and fulfilling the need to educate the populace affordably will always trump publisher's self-need. That's the promise made by the creation of writing, which wasn't done for self-interested capitalistic reasons but a way to facilitate communication between distant people (which fulfills capitalistic needs of distant people, fortunately). Considering free trade creates peace, and free books facilitates the globalization of potential students, facilities like Archive and Library Genesis are creating peace through digitizing books and making them available for free. That's because technology is always invented to facilitate writing and books and communication.

Literacy is the tool that will purchase your success as a worker in the modern, technological world. If you ignore books and don't read, you are not going to contribute to society. People say that people who don't go to college don't contribute to society, but I find that to be an attempt to fix a syndrome instead of the disease. People who don't read nor promote literacy don't contribute to society. Considering ebooks are now free, you can cut out college and instead read any book you want for free, and accordingly you can contribute to society as a reader and literate computer scientist instead of paying tens of thousands of dollars for access to books. Books use to be a scarce resource, but thanks to technology are now basically free. The cost of serving books can be covered through simple digital ads or donations now, not anything like the previous cost of books before the internet, computers, and open source technology. In other words, you can contribute to society at zero cost to you. You stand to earn money for benefitting society through computer science, so instead of paying for the college stacks you're debt free and able to save in index funds thanks to your frugality and build yourself effortlessly (just the cost of being frugal) a comfortable retirement. There should be zero guilt associated with unschooling. Seeing the waste and marginal utility of college versus investing in index funds while debt-free is applied critical thinking. The spectre of debt needs to be eliminated in modern times. Thanks to capitalistic innovation which brings us modern technology, we stand to have a very successful life. Everything that affords you a comfortable life has been built thanks to innovations in the cost of serving up books to the populace. That is the hinge upon which liberal democracies are built. The Greeks invented democracy around the time they stopped being an oral society. That's no coincidence, it is simply a fundamental theorem that books are the hexis upon which the body of modern free-trade libera democracies are built. There is no capitalism without affordable books, there is no technology without affordable books, and there is no democracy and peace without affordable books. Instead of being self conscious about using the latest manifestation of public libraries, now serving their patrons on the internet instead of downtown, we need to change our lives thanks to the changing world afforded by free books. Considering they are the best vehicle for the transmission of education, we need to facilitate their success instead of attempting to sue them out of oblivion through copyright law.

Things change, and industries (yes, even nonprofit ones) are retired thanks to advanced in technology. College was never guaranteed a continued existence. It had a good run, but as of late student loans have exploded instead of shrunk as technology improved. That just shows that colleges aren't able to cope with advanced in digitization and server technology. Instead they are finding themselves replaceable as open source education advances at a more rapid rate than them. Change need not be mourned. What was important to the previous generation need not be the sacred cow to the next generation. Considering youth today are being devastated by student loans, the digitization of public libraries should be celebrated as an answer to a crisis. There will always be naysayers, but they are not the people who will be read two thousands years from now, as the Greeks who invented democracy are today. That's because capitalism and democracy benefits from people not being in debt (even if that debt is generated pursuing a noble cause such as education). People will not keep pursuing going to college if that pursuit results in them getting punched in the face too many times. Considering the public libraries are serving their stacks digitally now for free, colleges will never be competitive to hardcore readers (who know that books are more important than conferences). Why pay for conference time when you can just read a book that your mom or dad's also read and discuss it with them? As literacy improves thanks to technology, the non-literate will become the literate and the need to attend conference with fellow literary students will decrease. As more moms and dads learn computer science, they'll be able to guide their children's education using free ebooks instead of paying for a professor to do so.

I think the most valuable gift to a child is literacy. Promoting reading is like applying compound interest or Moore's Law to a child. People who attempt to restrict reading to line their own pockets are abhorrent to me. In an age of abundance where all one's critical needs are affordable thanks to being digitized, the regressive attempts to preserve copyright at all costs due to viral hits will be cast to the dogs. The more realistic need of education a world at scale and affordably will trump the Dan Brown authors and Kanye musicians. That's because literacy isn't mere entertainment, but the vehicle upon which modern liberal democracy, capitalism, and free trade rely. It's not self interested to promote literacy, it is the foundation through which liberating technology is based. Literacy trumps the needs of college administrators and professors every time.

If you can find a way to promote literacy, do so in any capacity. I built Holm School based on the belief that reading vast amounts of computer science OER can produce in a student a college-equivalent education for free. When combined with the services of a public library, the risks associated with student debt are vanquished. I'm not surprised that the solution to a crisis is to promote and facilitate affordable books. That's pretty much been the standard for civilization since writing was invented. You can choose to promote civilization, or attempt to impede its progress for personal gain. Personally I stand on the side of public libraries, both digital and physical, because I believe their aims are to promote civilization instead of protecting their own stakes at any cost to the public.

It will take time for people to realize that college can now be payed for through the "expense" of viewing a few ads. It will take time for people to realize that literacy is available at the cost of a Raspberry Pi or a cheap tablet. It will take time for people to realize that the college experience isn't the classroom but instead the library, where you read books in your free time. Open source books can now be paid for through a global kickstarter of donations instead of done by a publisher that tries to extract every last penny from its creation, for as long as possible through copyright law. Kids will learn to read through their public library, which now exist on their tablet. Computer scientists will teach themselves to program through OER and Library Genesis instead of expensive colleges. That's just the progression of society. Being an early adopter, usually done through the right mixture of interest in reading with interest in technological innovation, can combine into explosive results that produce unimaginable wealth for the tech-and-personal-finance literati. Reading is a skill that now, just like at any other time during civilization, has the potential to improve people's lives. The focus needs to be on literacy instead of college. If the federal government used their resources to create a digital national public library, every book ever written would be accessible for just a few tax dollars per person. If the federal government sponsored the creation of OER textbooks which covered the topics of a computer science degree, they could train everyone in America to become a programmer at no cost to the person other than a few tax dollars. I think this will probably be the future of learning, especially since Library Genesis shows that international public libraries can be paid for through a couple ad clicks ("taxes") per person. College is not the future, widespread digital and online literacy is. If you ignore this trend, you'll find yourself in debt that compounds to the equivalent of millions of dollars instead of flourishing as a frugal computer scientist who invests in index funds starting at a young age. The choice is yours, as you bear the risks of being on the cutting edge. But along with riskier speculation comes the potential for greater profit. So I'm sharing my experience with benefitting from my public library to promote unschooling to others. I think this prediction will bear fruit for anyone who agrees with its premises. Literacy is more important than conference, and so free books available in real time on a global scale online will always trump going into debt for a few hours a week in conference for just four years. A lifetime of affordable literacy, from cradle to death, has the potential to shake up society in ways very few people realize. Let's all benefit from ubiquitous free public libraries instead of ubiquitous expensive colleges.

