---
date: "2019-06-25"
title: "#93 - You Should Insist On Nonpaper Books"
ghissue: 90
---

Today I learned about Perlego books just by googling "Spotify for Books." I'm pretty sure I search this every 3 months looking for the latest news, but for some reason had never discovered them. After just a brief excursion into their webpage, I am feeling confident about them. They basically are brand new, having just 600 followers on Twitter, but their pricing model is awesome: 12 pounds a month. This is about $185 a year. This is more expensive than Spotify, but for an initial offering without any market competitors at the moment, this price point is awesome! Unfortunately it’s only available in the EU, but when it comes to America I will most definitely be subscribing. I have longed to stop using Library Genesis, but without any subscription service for books that is complete, I am left with the option of paying Amazon usurious prices for kindle books. I refuse to do that, because single-purchase ebooks is a horrible model when there is Library Genesis and plenty of free CS OER, not to mention free subscriptions to Lynda and Treehouse at my public library. Some public libraries are even subscribing to SafariBooks, and maybe one day will subscribe to Perlego!

I hope once this plan comes out in America, that computer science professors will move to having a curriculum that uses books available on it. Obviously I am not optimistic, because professors seem to be deluded into believing that textbooks should be as expensive as possible when they basically cost as much as a year’s subscription to PluralSight. A paper book should never cost that much, nor should an ebook. With Library Genesis I haven’t bought a book for three years, and I don’t intend to start. I do, however, intend to subscribe to Perlego and will focus my study efforts on books offered on their platform. I am very comfortable doing this, because I believe in subscription services that offer 100% coverage of their target media, and so I subscribe to Apple Music. I don’t subscribe to anything movie-related because nothing offers 100% coverage yet. And what I do want to watch on my iPad, i.e. Teaching Company video lectures, are well covered in my free Kanopy subscription thanks to my alma mater’s (Washburn’s) university library. Kanopy is also offered through the Lawrence, KS public library. So my bases are covered, fortunately. The only other media not covered by a subscription is books, and here it looks like we finally have some potential that can initiate further market competitors from Apple and Google, which will offer 100% coverage while also being competitive in pricing. If you’ve followed Google Books since it’s invention, you’ll know that the Author’s Guild has used lawsuit after lawsuit to prevent books from being digitized and offered online. Hopefully now tides are changing with the success of Spotify/Apple Music.

I basically think there should be a Federal public library. It seems foolhardy to build public libraries in each town and be responsible for stocking their shelves with paper books when you could just offer a single Federal online public library and let all Americans read ebooks for free. I think this Federal public library could also find it’s calling in listing available OER for free download, and could even use government funds to sponsor the writing of OER (which would then be free online for anybody forever). Right now nonprofit endeavors like OpenStax are doing this, but I don’t see why it couldn’t be done at the Federal level. Having a Federal public library could put books into the hands of everyone in America, all without the tax burden of individual-town public libraries. Or else town public libraries could be a branch of the Federal library, offering amenities like Treehouse/Lynda subscriptions on top of a 100% coverage Federal public library. I think this would be a great modern Moonshot project, especially since books are infinitely more useful than Spotify or Netflix. To ignore digital books, by both state governments and federal governments, would be negligent. I love that my local public library subscribes to Libby/Overdrive, as I find going digital a necessity, but I don’t find their coverage useful enough for my research needs to use it instead of Library Genesis, not to mention that I need to wait up to two weeks for a copy of the book to be free. For the moment, Library Genesis is acting as a Federal public library, and I’m loving its utility until something legal and affordable can be invented. I also find a lot of potential in archive.org’s ebook borrowing model, which is offered through public libraries around the state, but again the offering is usually for 10+ year old books rather than recently published books. And again, book checkout counts are artificially restricted.

Perhaps we’ll live in a future where local public libraries will offer a subscription to a 100% coverage book service. For now, I think it’s important to emphasize the importance on insisting on nonpaper books. There is basically no future for paper books, especially with reading ebooks on an ipad/tablet such a pleasant experience. Today I threw away my collection of vinyl records, because I haven’t listened to a vinyl record in four years and it’s taking up space in my room. I kept a few that “spark joy,” in the words of Marie Kondo, but otherwise I’m happy. Of course, the past decade I’ve gotten rid of 99% of my print books too. I use to have an entire wall of books in four large bookcases, funded through my public library’s booktique that sold books for 25 cents while I was in high school. I have never been happier, especially with the invention of Library Genesis. There is a lot of advantages of not having any paper books, and I’m finding that Library Genesis and an ipad is an even better reading experience than paper. Why would I waste space in my room on paper books? Just like I don’t have a CD or vinyl collection anymore, I feel no need to have paper books in the age of Library Genesis. When someone invents the Spotify for books, this will be (legally) even more true.

I think about how colleges are built around paper books. Their libraries offer very few ebooks, and you usually have to install an intrusive piece of software like Adobe Digital Editions that have like a one-week checkout time period. Reading books on a laptop is basically hell on earth, and I don’t see why universities require you to go through so many hoops (having an adobe account along with your university account) in order to read their digital books. They don’t even curate their digital collections anywhere in libraries. Libby is a great app, for example, with great curation (although science isn’t their focus, as they usually only have pop science books). 

I believe if you are using paper books, you are basically writing yourself out of the benefits of free and affordable education. Computer science books are around $40 each, which is frankly ridiculous. This is tremendously expensive to you as well as other reading providers like public and university libraries. This cost is unsustainable, and pretty darn retrograde in the day and age of iPads and the internet. The internet provides a pipeline for reading ebooks that, as Library Genesis shows, can be basically free. Legal alternatives will be affordable, I’m sure, once they pass the hurdles put in place by publishers and authors’ guilds. Colleges are using an old model of reading that emphasizes paper books. Their bookstores only offer paper books and if they do offer digital books, they are nearly the same price as their deadwood equivalent. Colleges will try and say things like paper books facilitate discussion because of the standardized page numbers in bookstore editions, but I think that rather just goes to show that socratic seminars are kind of an outdated concept in the age of free OpenCourseWare and ebook readers. It’s basically the writing on the wall that colleges, with their enormous pricetags and costs to participate, don’t have much of a future with the modern internet.

If you use your iPad to read books, there is no reason not to go ahead and skip college and read the necessary books to know how to program at your first job for a fraction of a percent as brick and mortar college. Those paper books have no future, and just like I swept out all my paper books, vinyl records, and even DVDs, there’s no need to not sweep out the “deadwood” version of college. It’s an unsustainable expense for everyone involved, and clutters up (and weighs down) your life rather than augmenting it. Storing your entire book collection on your iPad is just an immensely gratifying experience if you are a voracious reader. Storing your entire college experience on the internet, if you are a voracious lifelong student, is one too.

There are some radical changes in store once Perlego comes to America. It will obviously engender the opening up of the Apple, Amazon, and Google archives too. The ability to read every book every published for $15 a month will forever change humanity for those that can afford $15, and heck maybe even local and Federal governments will start paying that fee on their citizen’s behalf. With ubiquitous affordable ebooks, which Library Genesis gives a beta version of, just like Napster provided a beta version of affordable music, the world truly stands to prosper. Teaching computer science will no longer be the stronghold of university, but will spread itself out to many open source educational nonprofits that step in where traditional nonprofit universities fail (mainly on the pricepoint and financial burden to young kids). No one should be tens of thousands in dollars of debt at age 22 when they begin their first job. The financial burden, when the 40 years of compound interest are sacrificed at student loan’s altar, equates to [student loans costing 32 times the MSRP](https://holm.school/secrets-compounding-interest/). When you declutter the university library and use only ebooks, you’ll find that the need of paying expensive tuition evaporates. It just isn’t the future. And ignoring what the future abodes is a great way to shoot yourself in the future. As computer scientists we share the burden of knowing about future technology, its impact, and ways to change our daily practices in order to benefit rather than be harmed by changes in society. Just like avoiding open source is a great way to sabotage your goals as a computer scientists, refusing to use digital media/archives/subscriptions is a great way to sabotage your chances of financial independence at a young age.

The university library is quaint, especially when you consider it’s tied to non-bankruptable student loan debt. It’s a symbol of exploitation rather than Enlightenment, as public libraries are. Enlightenment principles will explode once an affordable Spotify for Books is invented. Let’s hope this takes the form of Perlego at first, then the big tech companies can make their versions, then the local public libraries can create their offering, and finally a Federal public library will develop for future Americans. It’s a long journey ahead but be sure I’ll be watching it intensely. Maybe even people who offer college scholarships will change their philanthropy to focus on providing 100% ebook subscription packages to potential students who can’t afford it in its early, non-free phase. I bring up the Enlightenment because, if you’ve read Steven Pinker’s Enlightenment Now, you know liberal democracy is making the world extremely awesome. I think a good example of this is the emphasis on switching over to ebooks at a learning platform. It’s affordability holds radical potential for Enlightenment goals. Let’s embrace this potential now, rather than sleeping on it and further impacting our youth to their detriment.
