---
date: "2019-06-24"
title: "#94 - College is Just Gamified Reading"
ghissue: 89
---

[#94 of 100 Reasons Not To Go To College to Study Computer Science](https://holm.school/new-blog-series/)

College is the "video game" of education. By this I mean, whereas you can entertain yourself for free using the public library, both online and offline, many people spend their time playing videos games (which are not available for free at the public library). I could simplify this by propsing the "Public Library Sniff Test," in which the basic tenet is that if something isn’t available for free at the public library, it isn’t worth pursuing. This principle has guided me well in my life. I haven’t played video games for about 15 years, and as a result have said probably thousands of dollars wasting my time and requiring new computers every few years. Instead I used (up until last month) a ten year old computer and a seven year old iPad. In the words of Mr. Money Mustache: “Fairly boring, which is exactly how investing is supposed to be.”

In thinking about this principle recently, I discovered it also applies to college. Public libraries don’t offer college courses taught by professors (presumably they could) for free. Is college just another video game?

Making sure this wasn’t a misreading of something related more to funding/expense rather than education-related, I looked at my own public library. If the goal is a college level education in computer science, my public library offers something very close to it with a subscription to Treehouse and Lynda for their patrons. Throw in a few open coursewares along the way coupled with some OER textbooks, and it was basically a free college education through the public library. So a conclusion: Yes, college educations are not a waste of time, so yes they are offered by the public library. The difference is that the college education offered by the public library is completely stripped of gamification, which positions the non-public library college education as something much more akin to a video game than a valuable book.

Let’s explore gamification in college. First are the grades and degrees. Rather than just learning things as affordably as possible, you are positioned as a player in a game that requires you play the four levels (Freshman, Sophomore, Junior, Senior) in such a way that you maximize the points earned in a certain time period. These points are “requisites” and “prerequisites” for the final goal of earning a degree, in which you beat the game. Does my public library impose time limits (other than the due date of loaned-out books?). No, it is self paced. Does my library require that I attempt to maximize points in order to win the game? No, there is no degree at the end and as a result there is no point system. Am I inundated with trying to accelerate my education as fast as possible so that I don’t find myself in unsurpassable debt? Nope, again it’s free and self-paced to the limit of ability rather than proposing guidelines for time limits, and there isn’t a “penalty” for failing to complete the levels within the time limit. I came to the conclusion that college is just gamified reading, and that you’re paying the premium for that gamification instead of just entertaining (in this case, educating) yourself for free at the public library.

Video games a great way to completely blow your money. There are some rewards, like increased eye hand coordination, but their main benefit: hopefully a complex storyline, can also be found for free at what’s available at the public library. They have huge upfront costs: the latest hardware, the latest laptop, the latest console, the fastest internet. Colleges also have these, they are just found in tuition costs and dorm room expense. They appeal to young people, sometimes having unwritten age limits that people who don’t fit into the narrow 18-22 year old band sometimes have difficulty overcoming. Planned obsolescence is basically built into the package. Deviating from social norms of playing is considered boring or pretentious, and the publishers earn a lot for your continued dedication (i.e. TF2 hats’ equivalent of the college union/bookstore and their licensed fangear), so they want to maximize perceived entertainment value over true educational value. Public libraries don’t have hats and tshirts and fan communities (well, except maybe here).

College conferences are kind of like a video game. Instead of learning anything proportional to the cost, it’s basically a power play to see who can dominate the scoreboard and get the most “points” by talking intelligently about the reading material as much as possible. It’s zero sum and either you win or lose at semester’s end and the timelimit is up. Just like you can watch a let’s play on YouTube and learn the basic storyline of a video game rather than paying for it, you can just watch a “let’s play” of OpenCourseWare or a free college lecture series and learn the story without actually fidgeting with the controller. Turns out the real value is the storyline, not the eye hand coordination gains (i.e. public speaking skills used in conference). Of course there is value in eye hand coordination and speaking skills, but is that value worth tens of thousands of dollars when you can use alternative methods, such as talking with friends or joining a reading club?

It is somewhat irresponsible to blow your money on college, just like it’s irresponsible to blow your money on playing video games. OER/OCW really beats the “video game” that passes for college socialization, which is basically drinking and doing drugs. College isn’t straight edge, it’s a video game that requires unhealthy behavior. You should go out and exercise in the neighborhood with friends rather than drinking in a dorm room. Just like video games are psychologically addictive, college requires consuming expensive, addictive substances weekly if not daily. Without sounding like a PSA, you should get addicted to straightedge and reading science books, rather than a crappy social scene. Scientists don’t drink, at least any one you’ve read about in history books.

Remove all restrictions that inhibit your time for reading, like commuting costs and having to work to pay for tuition/dorm/cafeteria food/textbooks. Just by cooking for yourself, living at home, and going to the public library each day or reading Library Genesis on your ipad, you’re able to get a college level education in computer science. After you get employed you can focus on getting degrees through their tuition reimbursement benefit plan.

If you are concerned about not having a degree for your first computer science job search, make a github resume that contains each and every CS book you’ve read and OCW you’ve completed during your length of study. That’ll speak for itself and get you jobs. No one can argue with results and hard work.

College has levels and bosses that make you feel like you accomplished something, i.e. a grind, but that’s just gamification. Does a public library have levels and bosses? No, because it’s an archive and not an expensive video game. Does a public university offer a college education? No, because it’s too expensive for the limited rewards. If video games just cost a couple dollars, I bet public libraries would start stocking up on them. But the ROI is too low to justify their archiving. You can bet video game publishers are brainstorming ways to prevent computer games from becoming so affordable that public libraries can stock them on their shelves, because that would cut into their profits. So too are colleges, with things like degrees and socratic seminars as a way to hedge against people turning to their public library instead of paying those bloated tuition and textbook fees. I mean, textbooks are so expensive that public libraries can even afford to stock them on their shelves. That should speak volumes about where the priorities of colleges are, and they aren’t in saving you money and maximizing your education ROI.

Just like you don’t need to spend thousands on a gaming laptop when you can watch the game free on YouTube, you can use various online and offline public libraries to watch “the game” of college. Gamification is obviously fun, but find a way to incorporate it into your Library Genesis use rather than paying out the wazoo at a university. Make a catalog of every book you read on Github pages and update it everytime you finish a textbook. Blog about Holm Schooling. Open up a Vanguard IRA or brokerage account so you can watch your savings compound. Gamify frugality by going to goodwill to shop and trying to find bargains. Go vegan and live on cheap dried goods and affordable produce and fruit (can you beat my record of $100 a month?). Can you maintain a used car for 200,000 miles, or incorporate biking as a replacement? Can you find cheap goods on craigslist? Can you use the time saved on not commuting towards exercise and fitness? There are plenty of fun “levels” and bosses to conquer if you unschool rather than pay for college. See a way to break free from the normativity of gamified reading for outrageous prices and just sticking with plain old, run-of-the-mill reading for free. Read as much as you can, then relax by refining your life towards the goal of financial independence rather than prestige.

Make your video game Github. Level up on Github rather than accumulating expensive college credits, which aren’t open source. Contribute to Holm School if that’s the curriculum you’re using, and help out your “teachers” on Github through the repos you use rather than just handing over your money to professors for what passes as homework. Read and study, don’t play video games. That’s a rule for life, no matter what form the video games take. You can save money just by focusing on the reading part and divesting from the game. Is college, with all the degrees and accolades and prestige, not just a video game? I think it is. Library Genesis, OER/OCW, and your public library are free reading, and accordingly free college. It’s not gamified reading, but it is free reading, and that’s what’s important, not prestige and “achievements.” Make sure your achievements are IRL and related to education and not just icons on a video game profile page.

I sort of realized this when I played Asheron's Call at 13 years of age. They had just implemented housing in the game, and you could collect in game items to decorate your abode (which was really expensive in in-game money and effort). I realized one day that, rather than focusing on having a cool video game house, I should focus on improving myself so that one day I could afford a real life house and decorations. Video games would actually hurt my abilities to be successful enough in life to afford an expensive house, because they distracted me from "deep work," as Cal Newport would put it. So I quit buying new video games. I quit spending money on them and studied instead.

Now I'm older and realize the same thing of college. Rather than spending money on graduate school and going into debt, I should just focus on studying and improving my computer science skills rather than paying for a gamified education which just results in having a "higher level" in a resume and nothing than can be accomplished in real life without the massive debt. I want a real house that I can decorate, not just a higher level in a video game and more virtual coins and houses.

Stick with public libraries, online and offline, for you're education and you'll be directly benefitting your life without the side effects of expensive tuition and books. Resist the call to gamification that colleges have perfected, and quit playing video games completely. Addiction, whether to video games, alcohol and drugs, or prestigious degrees, threatens you directly. Computer science can be learned for free and has real rewards, and as such you should focus on doing that rather than just entertaining yourself. Hard work doesn't require a lot of expense. Results speak for themselves, and unschooling computer science is a great way to live a life of a scientist. This is possible thanks to open source. Let me know when video games/bricks and mortar colleges are free and open source. I'm willing to bet not in your lifetime.
