---
date: "2019-06-09"
title: "#95 - The Radical Potential of the Digital Public Library"
ghissue: 86
---

[#95 of 100 Reasons Not To Go To College to Study Computer Science](https://holm.school/new-blog-series/)

There is something interesting about books, which a public library practically specializes in owning. A book is ripe for easy digitization. If the book wasn't published recently enough to just convert the source word document into a pdf or epub, then the pages can be scanned one by one by just one location in the entire world then uploaded. This doesn't have to be done by every library anywhere, but only one location. That keeps the cost of digitization relatively low for the social reward of digitized books. The potential for disruption due to this ease is apparent when one looks at the effect the creation of .mp3s had on music stores. Most of them closed. Nobody purchases CDs anymore (and if they do they consume them by immediately ripping them into mp3s on their home computer). Music is consumed by a few apps -- Spotify, Apple Music, Google Play, and Amazon Digital Music. Rather than a chain store in every town hawking CDs, music is entirely online. You no longer have to drive somewhere, in a car or on the bus, to purchase anything. It's all done through digital subscriptions to your credit card. Rather than being expensive, it's amazingly affordable when you consider you have access to most every song ever written for the equivalent cost of a single lunch once a month. Rather than having a CD collection in a binder in your car, you have an "mp3 collection" of every song ever written. It's quite remarkable and it only took about 13 years after the appearance of the first portable mp3 players to achieve.

Books, though a little slower than the ease at which CDs can be converted into mp3s, are also being digitized and hosted online. Though there is no monthly subscription to the entire human archive yet, it will probably arrive within a decade through the same companies as mp3s (google, apple, amazon). It's no surprise to anyone that's had to pay $200+ dollars for a college textbook that the book industry is particularly resistant to digitization efforts -- the Author's Guild suing google books, etc. -- but eventually reality will force its way in and books will be available with a subscription. There are some efforts like Safari Books Online to have a large archive of computer science textbooks available at roughly $200 a year. This is kind of like the digitization of movies -- whereas there is no one service to subscribe to every movie ever made for a monthly fee, instead there are a ton of individual smaller archives usually hosted by a publishing outfit that you can access for a monthly fee. These small fiefdoms of digitized media are a final stand against the ultimate product -- all movies ever created for a monthly fee -- that will inevitably come about some time in the future. It's kind of like how Spotify replaced the iTunes store, even though the iTunes store did the hard work of convincing Music Labels to digitize their libraries. First it's little fiefdoms, then comes the ultimate library when all the fiefdoms are consolidated into a single subscription.

I talk about this in hopes that you become optimistic about the future of public libraries. Digitized books are available very inexpensively, and though at the moment public libraries are forced to subscribe to small archives like OverDrive/Libby and Hoopla, prices for ebooks will continue to drop as subscription archives increase their holdings as well as face competitors will larger libraries and more efficient price models. Public libraries will realize their impact will increase with the offering of a large archive of digital books, which don't require actually driving to the library and checking one out, but just a tap of a button on an ipad. Not spending the electricity to drive to the library is a much better option than checking out the deadwood copy. Digitized books aren't limited to a single copy (though subscription models prevent infinite checkouts and are restricted by the library's purchase price for now). For example, though products like OverDrive prevent checking out more copies of a book than the library purchases, content platforms like Lynda have no restriction on any sort like this on their library's tutorials. I imagine this will become standard in the not too distant future -- restricting digital copies is silly when it's literally digital. Not having to get yourself to a library is a golden opportunity because you can sit at home at not get eaten up by the sunk cost of the effort it takes to check out a deadwood book, so you can quit reading and effortlessly return it if the book turns out not to be good. It's small benefits like this that compel public libraries to focus more and more on digital books rather than paper. The trend will obviously continue.

Also worth noting is that ebook readers, which when first introduced were expensive and not very user friendly, are now ridiculously affordable, use a universal operating system like android or iOS, and can be purchased used to get even better deals. The ability to read hundreds of books a year digitally is worth the purchase price of a new or used iPad, for example. My iPad is seven years old and still works perfectly fine for all my reading and surfing needs. Fortunately books take almost zero computing resources to consume, so you don't have to have the latest hardware to "run" a book like you do a video game or something. You can purchase an ebook reader once a decade, for a hundred bucks! And then get an infinite amount of free books! How friggin amazing! And you don't even have to drive to the public library! I haven't set foot in my public library in four years, yet I consume their subscriptions nearly every day of my life. I can't help but think that the gas/electricity I save pays for my once-a-decade iPad purchase. I also never have to worry about late fees for missing the return deadline.

Digitized books are simply an amazing product, I even think they're more revolutionary than mp3s (and I was a huge fan of mp3s, --r3mix and --alt-preset standard 4 life!). Getting to read books, which I used to overdraft my debt card accidentally while in college when buying, can now be read for free on my iPad. I read about a hundred books a year, averaging one during the week and one or two on the weekend. Rather than going broke to read, I now pay zero dollars and still consume all the latest trending books I want to read. It's a remarkable system for the cost of internet and an iPad each month. It almost assures the cost of retirement will be much smaller than anticipated, because I will be able to entertain and educate myself for free every day of my retirement. I read books instead of watch movies (though I get a free Kanopy subscription through my alma mater library as well as the next town over's public library), and I don't play video games, so my main activities when I'm not working is reading books or watching video tutorials on programming. In this way I've been able to spend exactly zero dollars on entertainment since getting my first programming job. Books are many times over the best way to spend time, and rather than being limited by costs, I'm now limited by time in how many books I can read each year.

This is the radical potential of a digitized public library. You don't even have to leave your couch to check out the next book. When I can read nearly every magazine I want to read thanks to my public library's Flipster subscription (except Harper's, alas), I save a ton of money. When I don't have to drive to the public library to check out a book, I save money. When I can buy a seven year old iPad on ebay to cover my necessary hardware, I save money. When I can read any book every published through my public library's ebook subscriptions, Project Gutenberg, Archive.org, or Library Genesis, I save money. This is utopia for a reader, and one of the reasons I believe a digitized public library is such a valuable resource for a community. For example, I've taught myself index fund investing, personal finance, frugality, and FIRE strategies the past year completely though Library Genesis at a cost of zero dollars. I've turned my life around from having no money in the stock market to having a reasonable sum in tax-deferred index funds during that same year. Rather than being ignorant about FI and index funds and just thinking I needed to be frugal, I am now actively on the path to financial independence within ten years. All this knowledge for zero dollars. While I think listening to music inexpensively is a neat hack thanks to computers, I really feel that educating yourself for free is the 'killer app' for the twenty first century. Rather than shuffling between the public library every week, you can now read digitized books without ever going outside. You can put that money you save not driving back and forth to the public library towards buying a cup of joe at a cofeeshop and spending a day reading there for entertainment.

Public libraries were pretty darn cool even before they went digital -- it was my favorite place to go and hang out growing up (and the Topeka public library had a great art gallery which really affected my love of art, enough that I became an art history major). But with them going digital comes a great many benefits that even I couldn't have anticipated. I'm basically fluent in FIRE personal finance now thanks to the resources of Library Genesis and a bit of elbow grease in reading fifty or so books. When the resources your public library offered are mixed with other "digital public libraries" on the internet, you basically have all your bases covered. And if not, you can always subscribe to Safari Books to study computer science for $200 a year. Eventually you will able to read every book ever published for something around $20 a month. It's a remarkable time for self study, and the fact that you can read any book at the current moment through Library Genesis really changes the rules of the game. Rather than paying for the benefit of a university's library stack, you can read the exact same books that kids in college read FOR ZERO COST TO YOU other than internet and an ebook reader. There is really no reason to pay for college, considering the main benefit, a good library with advanced books, has been duplicated and made available online for free. There is nothing wrong with reading books on an iPad, it's quite pleasant and the screen being backlit is pretty neat too. Unfortunately you can't really read an iPad outdoors, but it's a small sacrifice. 

A public library has a greater impact than a university library. Rather than having a required fee for access, a public library is free to anyone. Whereas university library's don't really focus on digital books, a public library's main focus is increasing the number of digital books. PDFs and ePubs aren't a passing fad, they are as essential to modern life as mp3s. While people still like vinyl records, just like people still like paper books, there is no denying that the easiest way to consume the largest library of music/books are digitally. Library Genesis isn't going anywhere, it's now at the point that it will never be shut down other than when interest in using it wains due to the ease that an affordable Spotify-for-Books app can be used/subscribed. We've reached the utopia moment that almost all books, movies, and music ever created are available for a couple Hamiltons a month. Public libraries no longer need to buy expensive deadwood books, so they can devote their resources to things like ebooks and video subscription libraries like Lynda and Treehouse. Things are going to get better for patrons of digital public libraries, whereas things are only going to get more and more expensive for patrons of university libraries. The winner in the battle of education has been decided, and digital public libraries are much more beneficial to the world than university stacks. Not saying university stacks aren't fun, just maybe not worth the price of admission when compared to more affordable alternatives.

Best of luck in your journey of self improvement through digital books. I hope you read every book you ever want to for free and accomplish all your goals with zero debt. Aren't computers and computer networking amazing? Kind of makes you want to be a computer scientist and pass it on...

And that's my point. People pay a hundred thousand dollars to learn the rudiments of a discipline over four years at university for a bachelor's degree. Can you imagine the social benefit of digitizing that information so that you could receive an equivalent education for free? You would save people a hundred thousand dollars, and in a way that scales to reach thousands if not millions of people at nearly zero cost to the "free" university! That's why efforts like [EbookFoundation](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books), [OSSU](https://github.com/ossu/computer-science), Library Genesis, and all those MOOC platforms are so exciting. They have the potential to save millions of people tens of thousands of dollars. The only problem is you have to be self disciplined and self motivated, but I think the carrot of a hundred grand and a job is good bait. As public libraries themselves begin to offer platforms for their patrons which rival a computer science bachelor's degree (like Treehouse, Lynda, or Safari Books), there will even be greater incentive to jump ship from college and study for free at the public libraries online. A digital public library is radical in its scope. It can compete with colleges very easily. This idea, just like Open Source, is no longer going to be "fringe" but will be one of the common considerations an 18 year old has to take in regards to learning computer science. The idea that skipping college and studying CS at a digital public library will no longer seem ludicrous, but financially savvy.

With regards to concern over using Library Genesis, which in my opinion is just a public library like any other public library, I recommend: [https://questioncopyright.org/promise](https://questioncopyright.org/promise) Public libraries, in all forms, whether digital or deadwood, are the result of [Enlightenment radicalism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_library#Enlightenment-era_libraries). The fact that modern public libraries in the 21st century now compete with colleges in their scope, reach, and affect should come as no surprise, again, this is just a fulfilling of Enlightenment tenets that liberal democratic education not be hidden away behind expensive tutor fees and only available to the aristocracy. Colleges decided that they want to cater to the aristocracy when they decided to charge usurious amounts of tuition paid for by non-bankruptable student loans, all so they could become fat cats like the aristocracy whose kids they chose to cater. Not that there's anything wrong with being an aristocrat, I guess, but some things like the invention of the internet have permitted "The People's University" to outcompete the real thing. Good! That was the university's choice when they moved away from societal good to being a parasite on 18-22 year olds when they realized [they could get away with it](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Student_debt). It's like a mini public library Renaissance and the beast is back kicking stronger than ever.

This should be no surprise, because the requirements to publish and distribute a book online and in open source form are now found in any Raspberry Pi for $35 and a free github account. As publishing books no longer requires the infrastructure of printing presses and supply chains of distributors, now anyone can create open source books. The digitization of books is so inexpensive that it's a matter of quality of authorial product rather than quantity of publisher-owned printing presses. Obviously computer scientists stand to profit the most from open source, and that's why you see CS education in the position of being most cutting edge for inexpensive but efficient edtech. Just as publishers are being written out of the creation and distribution of books, so too colleges are being written out of the teaching of computer science. This is good because debt when you're young turns out to be really expensive when you [have to pay of compounding loans rather than investing in compounding index funds](https://holm.school/youth-importance-avoid-debt/). If an "education" in computer science costs more than a couple hundreds of dollars a year, [it's probably a rip off](https://holm.school/96-paying-to-study-offline-is-a-rip-off/). That's just empirical truth in 2019. Open source has won in the real-world-impact of education expenses, and tuition fees just can't compete with what is available for CS education through open source educational resources. If the textbook you are studying with for computer science isn't open source, you are probably being taken advantage of by someone. Knowing when to pay for CS educational resources is something that comes along with being Holm Schooled, you become a virtuoso of discerning when something is worth paying for. Usually the best judgements come to a value of a couple hundred a year, not anything like $10,000+ for public university. A single year of public university could fund fifty years of PluralSight. With those statistics, you'd better keep it safe and stick with the knowledge that comes from Holm Schooling and keeping debt as low as humanly possible while young. You can probably get a job after studying fifty years of PluralSight, but you probably would find it much more difficult to find a job with just a year of CS at a public university. The goal is to get a job as fast as possible with costs as low as possible. The strategies you learn at Holm School will enable you to secure a programming job -- which then you can get all the degrees and certificates you need with tuition reimbursement -- with close to zero debt. Personally I would chose fifty years of PluralSight over a year of CS at a public university any day. Those are the types of cost analysis you need to consider when you're 18 and staring at the college admissions abyss. Take the frugal choice: Your public library, OpenEd, and affordable EdTech.

I truly believe that it is a monumental time to be alive with regards to affordable education. Library Genesis is essentially a college education for free. An international digital public library is a futuristic idea, but that's what Library Genesis is. It's a revolutionary tool for anyone interested in learning science. Rather than being beholden to tie yourself up with student loans for a crack at some books at a university library, you are essentially liberated from debt and able to "study" on your own using every STEM book ever written for the cost of internet each month. Considering reading books is the best way to study, it truly knocks the socks off any MOOC or video tutorial library. I would suggest combining video tutorials with a heavy reliance on Library Genesis, and power through as much computer science studying as you can while you're unemployed. It's a free college education in a bottle. It won't necessarily be around forever, some real legal tangles are being tossed its way, so use it in its present form as much as you can. Having an international public library of STEM is the type of thing that could cause a Renaissance, and anyone who is interested in learning STEM (honestly, there aren't that many people who are) can up their game for zero cost. Considering STEM has many public benefits, humanity really stands to prosper because of Library Genesis. There is no need to wait for public libraries to expand their digital offerings and video tutorial subscriptions, at this moment you can self educate a college education at Library Genesis. It is silly to go into debt for STEM if it isn't required. Many people want more scientists in the world because of their return on investment as they invent new things, so people will always strive to make STEM Education resources available for as cheaply as possible. You stand to benefit directly if you have the brain for STEM. Turning your back on modern technology like cloud databases and international networking is like anathema to what science hopes to achieve. To think that the public library has nothing to offer you as a scientist is antiquated. Many schools want to promote the notion that you can only become a scientist at university. This might be true in other STEM disciplines, but certainly not computer science. Everything necessary to become a computer scientist is available at Library Genesis. Don't be made to feel guilty for using a public library to become a scientist. Get a college education for free through Library Genesis.

I am honestly so excited for digital public libraries because I truly belief we are basically going to instigate a Renaissance with the ubiquity of free ebooks. Computers/the internet are instigating a Renaissance right now that most of us are oblivious to, but I think with kids now able to teach themselves a college CS curriculum for free, we're just going to keep causing Renaissance after Renaissance. It's almost like Renaissances are Compounding thanks to the invention of computer. It's a fiercesome force when free markets, global peace, international liberal democracies, and science/computers are all reaching an apex three hundred years after the Enlightenment. Maybe even AI will mature a bit and cause a Renaissance of its own? I'm not impressing anyone with edicts that the internet is revolutionary, but want I want to instill is that using it to teach yourself for free isn't a crime, it's actually the direct product of hundreds of years of post-Enlightenment research and development. Library Genesis, just like Napster, will eventually be replaced by a (legal) subscription service. But as we learned with Napster, the digital software comes before the legal precedence. It's perfectly natural to anyone who grew up with computers, but older people might not understand that copying digital files isn't theft. They hear it and think we're sticking up authors for their lunch money on the sidewalk. 

Unfortunately those same older people allowed "the system" to regress to the point that college education, rather than being universally available in liberal democracies, is affordable by only the rich. Other people are screwing themselves financially trying to get a university education. While that marks itself as a failure to some degree, personally I don't care because the public library and other digital libraries, legal and illegal, are picking up the slack. Many capitalists are not motivated by the Enlightenment, which ironically invented capitalism, and are willing to sacrifice Enlightenment ideals to protect their and their children's privilege. That's what John Bogle calls "manager's capitalism" and there is truly a battle for the soul of capitalism at the moment. Fortunately we have a good weapon on our side for this glorious revolution against manager's capitalism: the internet. You can't compete with science (and computer networking). People talked shit on wikipedia but look what we have now: a free encyclopedia. Library Genesis will also go from being scorned to being considered disruptive technology once a proprietary version comes out that clones its utility. Inexpensive legal book archives are just around the corner, and accordingly, inexpensive college educations will soon be legal and mainstream. It is inevitable. Open source software is going to be the dominant paradigm for software, and probably can be considered the main engineering practice now. There will be more and more educational services offered by public libraries for free for all patrons around America, and Treehouse/Lynda/SafariBooks is just the beginning of the offerings. It's going to get amazingly ridiculous, and I am just going to sit back and laugh and laugh as colleges are forced to adapt, thinking about the $70,000 I spent on a zero-ROI art history degree. Their obvious response will be to raise tuition in order to maintain the Prestige with a capital P that is essential to their marketability, but Prestige won't buy you back $70,000 of debt at age 22. That $2.6+ million dollars of evaporated retirement money for four years of just reading some books and writing some essays will speak for itself to the next generation of computer scientists, and they'll find communities that meta-educate on what to do to succeed education-wise outside the boundaries of the university. Open source meta-educational communities like this one, OSSU, and EbookFoundation, and many others on github, I hope. Otherwise we're going to keep facing the student debt crisis in the face of Free-College-Educations available through your local public library and Library Genesis. I would rather that $2.6 million go to students rather than Prestige U. Four years of reading some [public domain humanities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_books) or computer science books can be done at your public library or even on Project Gutenberg. $2.6 million or a piece of paper/degree, the choice is yours. [Don't be a consumer sucka](http://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2012/04/18/news-flash-your-debt-is-an-emergency/). Just plop that cost of college, public or private, into a compound calculator and set interest to 10% and years to 35-38 to simulate a few years of a maxed out 401ks and IRAs to mimick the saved tuition. It'll blow your mind (ever seen the back of a $2 million dollar bill on weeeeeeed, man?) That's what Library Genesis is: It's a free $2 million dollar bill on the pavement. Don't let your guilt/morals dictate that you keep walking on in hopes that it's retrieved by its rightful owner eventually: Pick the damn $2 million dollar bill up and stuff it in your wallet! Finders keepers.

Lots of people don't understand the meaning behind free artifacts on the internet. They think it's voodoo magic or some sort of wizardry. Perhaps it is a sort of wizardry, but it's a beneficial wizardry and not detrimental. Many people decide to go on the track that have historically been travelled, going to college and signing up for tens of thousands of dollars of loans, and paying them off your first decade or so as a programmer. That's ridiculous in my opinion in this day and age of a digital public library, and there is radical potential to avoiding debt at an early age and learning CS on your own. Don't fall into the trap of thinking the alternative path is wizardry, it's quite classical -- if not [neoclassical](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neoclassicism) -- in its intent to disseminate liberal arts and science knowledge as widely as possible. Just because it's digital doesn't mean it's anything new. The internet, after all, is basically just an [international public library](https://www.gatesfoundation.org/What-We-Do/Global-Development/Global-Libraries). To think of it otherwise, as is the case of social media, is disastrous. If you are doing something on the internet that isn't treating it like a digital public library, you are probably wasting your precious time and fuelling addictive behavior.




