---
date: "2019-06-06"
title: "#96 - If You Are Paying to Study Offline, You Are Probably Getting Ripped Off"
ghissue: 85
---

[#98 of 100 Reasons Not To Go To College to Study Computer Science](https://holm.school/new-blog-series/)


Full ride scholarships are pretty rad, so if you get one anywhere I’d suggest you take it regardless of perceived prestige of the college. But if you aren’t lucky enough to get a full ride scholarship, I have to present the conclusion that if you are paying money to study computer science, you are probably getting ripped off. I consider “money” anything more than $300 a year. And if you are paying money for paper books, you are also probably getting ripped off.

I think of it like this: All it takes is one good recording of a computer science class and its lecture to be uploaded on the internet for everyone in the world to consume. That’s some ridiculous return on investment: For the cost of a professor’s salary for one class, plus some recording equipment, anyone in the world who is an English speaker can learn a full semester’s worth of computer science. That means for roughly $20,000, maybe 100 million people can benefit in the entire world for the rest of time. That means the cost you should be paying for that lecture is 20000/100000000, or 2 hundredths of a cent to pay for it. That can easily be paid for by just a single ad view, or maybe just a banner ad placed on a page. In my opinion, paying more than a cent for a class on computer science is getting ripped off. People sometimes pay $1,000 at a public university for a single computer science class, which is a 10000000000% percent markup. If I were selling a digital product for a ten billion % markup, I would be making gangbusters. And that’s what college is in the day and age of YouTube, it’s a gigantic racket that is totally obsolete by normal means of market competition. If there was a package of soap for $2 on the market shelf, and a competing brand for $200 million dollars for an equivalent package, people are willing purchasing – WITH NON BANKRUPTABLE LOANS – the $200 million dollar package of soap. That’s ridiculously amazing, and no wonder the student debt crisis is one of the biggest problems youth face in modernity. That’s because they’re purchasing – again, with NON BANKRUPTABLE LOANS – a product that is marked at a 10 million percent markup compared to its market competitor.

I mean seriously, people just need to meditate on the meaning of free video hosting and the ubiquity of high resolution cell phone video cameras. On those two inventions alone, paying tuition is dead in the water. A college course in computer science costs 0.0002 cents to consume thanks to YouTube. Maybe you haven’t noticed the complete revolution in society that happened as a result of the invention of the internet and modern computers? A good that people used to take out loans to purchase is now two hundredth of a cent. In my opinion, that’s a revolution. Yet everyone is apparently oblivious to it. People aren’t studying computer science any more than in the past. A discipline that invented the technology to do a feat like that isn’t viewed as probably the future of most everything important in civilization. People still aren’t study computer science. CS still isn’t taught in elementary, middle, or even high school. The only people who learn to program before the first year of college are learners who teach themselves online. It’s a travesty that this occupation isn’t being promoted to most everyone capable, given that it’s return on investment appears to be ten billion percent.

I’m no complaining though. Because I know I’m right, and that free open source online education on computer science is the future. Once you spend a couple years studying CS online, you’re primed for a beginner’s job developing software somewhere. In a few more years of hard word and continued study, you’ll be prepared to invent the sort of technology that enables ten billion percent return on investment. I’m no mathematician, but multiple ten billion percent by ten million people or so who grow up learning CS for free online, enabled by technology like Raspberry Pis and public library computers for kids, and you’re getting a huge return on investment on that Educational Technology. If computer scientists keep creating inventions that reduce the price of consumer goods by 200 million times, the more people who are able to train themselves with free OCW/OER, lowering barriers to entry, will benefit society immensely. Maybe even a future without 40 hour work weeks! People won’t need to retire early because the burden of a job will be so low because consumer goods will be so affordable.

That’s the sort of future I’m envisioning by people learning computer science through Holm School. I’m willing to spend my time hyping and building up this project because the return on society as people learn to be expert coders for free online is basically incalculable. That’s why I’m not surprised public libraries, who function on the humanist goal of bettering society, are willing to spend the big bucks purchasing Lynda/Treehouse/SafariBooks subscriptions for their patrons. That’s what I mean by saying public libraries operate under Moore’s Law. I can learn modern full stack web development on my public library Treehouse and Lynda account for the cost of a computer and internet. That’s basically $2200 dollars over four years. A public college degree in CS, which costs the cost of a computer and internet plus $8000 a year tuition, totals $34200 over four years. That’s my public library delivering a 1555% reduction in my educational expenses. That’s an amazing service provided by my public library. Ten years ago that would have been impossible. College would have still cost $35,000 dollars. Now I can get a college-level education in CS for $2200. If that sort of reduction of the cost of a consumer good in seven years isn’t an example of Moore’s Law in action, then I’ll eat my hat. In the future, we’ll get even more computer science resources for free from our public libraries as more EdTech companies are started up and things continue to be digitized and book online cheaply according to Moore’s Law.

Moore’s Law is sort of the corollary to the magic that is compound interest. While saving while young can lead to an early retirement, EdTech being a product on Moore’s Law means the cost of education is going to soon be almost free. If you don’t realize this is going to be publicly accepted truth in just a few years, you’re probably being ripped off by a college somewhere. I’m not sure why people would pay hundreds of thousands of dollars for an education they can receive for free in exchange for watching a few ads before videos. If you understand that a college course costs $0.00002 in the day and age of YouTube, you’re well on your way of incorporating that knowledge into a successful financial independence strategy.

That’s not even mentioning Library Genesis. I use to spend hundreds of dollars a year on purchasing books starting roughly at age 17, but now I haven’t bought a book in three years. The cost of my education with regards to purchasing book was reduced to the cost of my seven year old ipad and internet amortized. That, again, is basically Moore’s Law in action. If you are paying money to read computer science books, instead of reading them free on your ipad or laptop thanks to Library Genesis, you are probably getting ripped off. I realize I will probably not read more than one or two paper books a year. I’m okay with that, because I’m still reading roughly a hundred books a year for free. Those hundred books would have cost me probably $1000. The amortized cost is roughly a reduction of somewhere around 1000%. That again shows that a simple product of computer science reduced a consumer cost I was willing to pay to something around 1000% less expensive in a matter of three years time. The cost to publish a book, say $40,000, is divided by the possibility of ten million readers online. That comes to roughly $0.004. The cost to read a textbook, in the day and age of Library Genesis, is 4 tenths of a cent. That again can be paid with a simple ad view. 

All this is possible because digital public libraries are on Moore’s Law. Whereas the public library used to have to purchase a single copy for its local patrons to be borrowed one after another, now a public library can purchase a single digital copy and upload it to Library Genesis and the digital copy is available to every person with an internet connection in the world. Public Libraries no longer are physical, but digital. A digital public library serves everyone in the world, with costs that are basically $15 for an ebook read by a million downloaders, or $0.000015 of total cost for each reader to the library. Even better if that ebook is donated by a person who did purchase it, in which case the public library can deliver it for zero cost beyond its yearly server fee amortized by all users. Again, a cost that can be mitigated by a simple ad view by each patron.

A college class, when executed using YouTube and Library Genesis or through other public library services, roughly costs the expense of a single banner ad view, or maybe a video view. If you ask me if I’d accept a college education for the expense of a couple hundred ad views, I would gladly accept. And that’s what I’m doing/did. I paid for my college education in computer science (a really good degree with a good return on investment for the effort) with viewing a couple hundred ads as I went along throughout the years. I have no regrets about not being in debt. And neither will you.

If you aren’t amazed at the ability to download a book and read it on your ipad for free through the public library Library Genesis, you probably didn’t go broke at a point in your life purchasing books (whether for a college class or for pleasure). The fact that Library Genesis is paid for by a couple of banner ads when you download the book is truly amazing. That’s the power of open source licenses and the internet. If you aren’t creating products that are open source, you are never going to be competitive in the future markets. Not creating products with an open source license is akin to trying to take society off Moore’s Law, and all the benefits it affords. Moore’s Law is as magical as compound interest. To not open source your product, thus not placing it on Moore’s Law, is akin to not investing in index funds while young by avoiding debt, thus not placing yourself on the compound interest curve. Both are grave mistakes that belie a complete misunderstanding of the implications arising from the invention of computers in the forties. If you don’t acquaint yourself with computer science and open source license, and all that information is available for a couple ad views here and there, you’re not participating in civilization and civilization’s rapid growth thanks to Moore’s Law.

I hope as someone that understands compounding interest, you’ll be equally amazed by how open source licenses are basically compound interest for the benefit of society. That’s because open source is a really good implementation of free market capitalism, which is a bedrock of liberal democracy. Liberal democracy is sort of endeavor that humanists undertake in order to invent new ideas like open source licensing. It’s probably the case that “the public domain” [actually invented liberal democracy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jcvd5JZkUXY) as we know it. As more people abandon the counter-enlightenment for liberal democracy, aided by modern technology and science and the pacifying effects of free markets, more people will abandon the prevailing counter-enlightenment ideology that copying is theft, whereas open source licensing teaches that [copying is not theft](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IeTybKL1pM4). “Copying is not theft” is a central tenet of free markets, in my opinion, as well as liberalism as a movement. People harbor conservative ideologies in various ways, but copyright is probably the most prominent conservative/counter-enlightenment paradigm throughout the world. That’s why open source is so important to be taught, because it is a return to the concept of the public domain from which liberal democracy sprung. Totalitarian ideologies always tries to shit on free markets, since that’s probably where totalitarian ideologies have the most potential for impact on people’s brains, but as a liberal humanist, I will do my best to promote the public domain through Holm School.

So, in conclusion, if you are paying to study offline, you are probably getting ripped off. I think people should be a little more aware of where they’re being taken advantage of, because cognition of exploitation has lead to some really great things like liberal democracy and free markets. I think allowing people to be ripped off and not run a social campaign in some form is a little complicit. That’s why I’m working on Holm School to promote the message that you can get a college-level education in computer science for the cost of watching a couple hundred ads over the course of a year. It’s so non-intrusive anyway, it’s a good example of how Moore’s Law/Compound Interest really benefits basically everyone in modern free markets. Civilization has benefited immensely from technology, and the burdens and stresses faced by modern people will continue to be alleviated by new inventions which make expensive consumer goods practically free. In my opinion, one of those consumer goods is now computer science educations, which has been reduced by a factor of ten billion percent. That sort of low cost can be covered through a simple ad on the webpage. It’s quite a remarkable system and I hope it thrills as many people as it thrills me.


