---
date: "2019-06-05"
title: "#97 - Living at Home For Four More Years Isn't That Bad"
ghissue: 84
---

[#98 of 100 Reasons Not To Go To College to Study Computer Science](https://holm.school/new-blog-series/)

A lot of people think turning 18 means independence, at last. I find that ironic since most 18 years have roughly enough savings to maybe pay for 3 months of living in an apartment. For some reason, going into debt to live in an apartment you have no means to pay for, _for four years_, is viewed as a wise decision. The cost of living in a dorm is on average $10,000 a year according to google. It's nice that that includes food, but considering I've learned how to spend $200 every two months eating WFPB, I think in most cases paying that much for board is quite a rip off. When including $200 a month for food, you are basically paying $633 a month for a tiny apartment you have to share with at least one other person. This seems like a ridiculous deal, when living at home is free.

I recently had to pay off a leasing contract when I left early for a new job in my hometown. I had to spend roughly $5000 for the remaining months. What a horrible feeling! I was paying a lot of money for a good I wasn't even receiving. Yet this is what 18 year olds do, not for five months, but for 48 months when they go to college! BEWARE! THERE IS NO BONUS WAITING FOR YOU WHEN YOU GRADUATE. No one is going to pay off those 48 months of unpaid rent as a reward for getting a degree. Instead you'll be saddled with an IMMENSE debt when you're only 22.

And I'll tell you, there is nothing so essential from 18-22 that living at home doesn't suffice for human happiness. At age 22 you are still basically a kid, and living at home from 18-22 _thus isn't that bad_. You want to live at home when you're still young, not when you're old, and so 18-22 is the perfect age to live rent free at home instead of entering a non-bankruptable contract equivalent to 48 months of rent backpay (and that's not even including tuition!). Dorms aren't any cheaper than apartments, and it's common knowledge that apartments are _expensive as hell_.

Spending money you don't have is a recipe for disaster, and when I look at the EdTech landscape in 2019 I can see the potential to never go into debt for a college degree if you use philanthropic endeavors like UoPeople or OMSCS for a degree, while utilizing the public library and online educational resources like OER, OCW, and miscellany like Library Genesis. It's a remarkable world, a four year bachelors of science [F-You Degree](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree) that you can pay off as you go with the equivalent of 4 hours of minimum wage work a week. Graduating with zero debt and all the skillset as any other programmer, to get a junior dev tech job that will PAY FOR YOUR RENT (instead of you bottom lining it!), while also enabling you to save 50-70% of your salary in tax-deferred and non-tax-deferred index funds. Starting at age 22 with zero debt and a positive cash flow is what enables early retirement or financial independence.

Living at home and studying online sounds like anathema to all those kids who have been told by college recruiting offices that "normal" kids move to a different state and live in dorms (or rent houses/apartments). That's simply crazy, and as someone interested in personal finance I'm amazed that this is what passes for culture in America. Going into debt while young is dangerous. I do not consider education a "good debt" when because of open source all the learning you need _for life_ (not just age 18-22) is available online for at most a couple of hundreds of dollars a year. As [Ryan Carson](https://medium.com/views-from-the-treehouse/your-college-degree-will-cost-you-2m-c20c2570bd57) and [myself](https://holm.school/retire-a-millionaire-by-skipping-college) have pointed out, for all those assurances that college grads earn a million more in their lifetime, the actual cost of college debt takes away more than a million dollars of possible returns of index funds.

Personally, if someone told me you could have a million dollars just to live at home from age 18-22, I would scoop that up. I imagine most people would. Yet that's the opportunity cost a high percentage of 18 year olds give up when they sign up for a dorm contract at an out of state college. I promise you, colleges are extremely predatory. They are not in the business for promotion of knowledge in American society. They might have been during the age of the Enlightenment or whenever when colleges were invented and founded, but that is not their modus operandi anymore. They are extremely predatory -- just look at the irony that college debt is non-bankruptable. If a college education were so valuable to society, why is its cost non-bankruptable? Sounds like loan sharks with their metal pipes coming for your kneecaps more than a societal blessing. Yet people think colleges are totally benevolent, and they are more than happy to pay tens of thousands of dollars for a liberal arts education. This is so remarkable to me because colleges aren't even open source. There's nothing about them that is open source. Their libraries usually have locks (card entries) on them, keeping out non-students. Nothing is "forkable," nothing is copyleft, and nothing is viral. It's a relic of the past that worked before the internet, but since the invention of the internet has become involved with thuggish tactics to preserve their prestige, public persona, and especially coffers.

Colleges were invented long ago, coming of age during the Enlightenment, but their replacement was invented when ARPAnet came around, and had their coming of age during the 'oughts when Google developed the infrastructure for free video hosting using a nonintrusive ad model. The modern internet in 2019 is the replacement of college. While people use to say "I'm going to college," modern people should say "I'm going to the internet" when referring to the same thing. Going to college in the day of the internet is like willingly walking into a tarpit. The tar is the fact that college debt is non-bankruptable thanks to American politicians. I believe it's the only debt that is non-bankruptable. Look at that fact and identify it as a virtual tarpit. If you touch this plague that is student debt, you are going to get infected. While people think of bubonic plague as the defining trait of the medieval ages, I think centuries from now people will look as college's behavior after the maturity of the internet as the defining trait of our age. It's an economic plague rather than a biological plague, but people are certainly still being hurt. It is a travesty.

I present a bizarro new world being created thans to the invention of the internet. Whereas learning at the public library twenty years ago was used as a [punchline](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=azM6xSTT2I0) by the proto-frugal, the new frugality offered by the internet is finding its home not in the university but the public library. Public libraries are now offering free archives of books and videos digitally through their subscription platforms. Whereas public libraries were previously repos of light reading for pleasure, the public library is now the replacement for the university. Instead of going to university, people will now go to the public library to earn their "degree." Though as of this moment, there are no real degrees, in the case of computer science it doesn't really matter because knowing to program is all you really need in order to secure a job. Computer scientists earn their job by exercising their learning and scholasticism. It is not purchased at a university for tens of thousands of dollars. Learning and scholasticism will take place at the public library using their online services as well as the general internet. A college equivalent in computer science will be brainlessly accessible thanks to video curriculum detailing how to program and nearly a complete archive of every computer book ever published. These levels of resources won't be offered at universities, ironically, instead they'll only be offered by public libraries. As more and more people discover these resources and decide that their cost (free) is much more competitive than university, what use to take the lone genius of Will Hunting will become standard behavior in America.

Where European countries have free college, in America we will have free public libraries. In every region throughout America. No matter where you are located, you will have access to an "MIT-level" education in computer science. This will happen because the very internet that makes it possible foretells that in the future all workers will have to know how to code in order to earn a salary. This isn't a bad thing, but is actually awesome because as more jobs require code, it means more things in America will be _free_ or virtually free, reproducible, open source, and widespread. Rather than being limited in what companies can produce, companies will create open source solutions to the problem of scarcity that defines free market capitalism. Open source is the virtual manifestation of free market economies, and is capitalism evoked. That's because the supply and demand curve for open source software and hardware is "free for everyone, everywhere." Public libraries are now on the exponential curve of Moore's Law, while colleges are not but are BigO of n. Public libraries are open source and electronic, but colleges are deadwood and scarcity-driven. Just think about the model of "prestige" that the entire concept of modern private colleges runs on, and you'll see that scarcity is the curve that colleges lie on. Prestige will and always will be non-Moore's Law. But open source public libraries are definitely on Moore's Law, and we'll see their ubiquity and affordable get crushed in the oncoming decades. I'm willing to bet on it (i.e. why I'm creating a nonprofit to fund computer science education at my local public library).

Would you move to a different state to attend their public library? Haha, of course not. What a laughable idea. You would stay at home and attend your own local public library. That's the reason why staying in your family home from age 18-22 and Holm Schooling is such a good idea, because everything is available at your local public library. Whereas previously you were defined as lucky if you had a public university in your hometown, now you will be defined as lucky if you have a good public library in your hometown. "College Town" as a word will be replaced by "Public Library Town." Of course that's absurd, because every town is a public library town. And that's why public libraries are on Moore's Law and colleges are not. It is through this vector that college-level education in computer science will be exponentially more affordable than the alternatives. I believe this moment is now, but some will say it is in the oncoming decades. Nevertheless, I think it's safe to say it's a good use of time to start analyzing the true cost of a college education.

Part of that true cost is the mandatory purchasing of an apartment without any means of paying for it. 48 months of rent is a tragic burden that should never be foisted on a 22 year old. I think this can only be assumed to be happening because most 18 year olds have never had the requirement of paying for rent before, so they are oblivious to how annoyingly expensive it is. The alternative of staying at home and Holm Schooling is so attractive to anyone who understood the advantage of living at home while attending a local university. The advantage is doubled by avoiding tuition on top of avoiding rent. Having zero debt but the programming knowledge that comes from Holm Schooling computer science for four years allows you to pump your savings that you earn from your frugality into index funds, etc., which can compound for 40 years. When you mix zero debt with the magic of compounding interest, you'll be amazed at the results. The results in my own personal experience (which, I think I noted before, have been basically facilitated by Ryan Carson's products ([Treehouse](https://teamtreehouse.com) and his "Educate Yourself" podcast) have been life changing, and sometimes I cry at how prosperous my life is thanks to the education I received from Ryan Carson and his team. I hope everyone can experience what debt free computer science education means, especially since it is so readily available (even though most people don't know about it) at places as simple as public libraries in your state. Or else online. It's all there for just a couple hundreds of dollars a year, at most.

Just like no one would pay for a high school education with public schools around, in the future no one will pay for a computer science education with public libraries and the internet around. It's _free_, who would go into debt for a public good?

So would you rather have a million dollars or a dorm room for four years? I'm making no guarantees, but the possibly is there for the wise to take. My suggestion: Live at home and study at Treehouse, Khan Academy, your public library, and Holm School computer science online. I think you'll be surprised at the results. At most you'll have spent a couple hundreds of dollars over the course of four years. The alternative, spending hundreds of thousands of dollars of non-bankruptable money for a potentially useless diploma, seems to me the worse odds. And I'm a fan of good odds.

To add one last thing, as a vegan straightedger, I won't pay any mind to the whine that you can't drink/party at home. That's actually a huge benefit to living at home from age 18-22, especially to your account. Alcohol is dangerous/cancerous, addictive, and expensive, and in fifty years will be viewed with the disdain we currently hold towards smoking cigarettes for example (I'm nearly positive). If you are addicted to psychoactives, buy the placebo and wean. You shouldn't consume animal products and you shouldn't consume addictive psychoactives, in my humble opinion, though that's obviously not mainstream. Since when was Holm Schooling mainstream? Wife and child beating was mainstream half a millennium ago...

And as an addendum: If you are willing to put up with living at home for a few more years after getting your first job (if it's in your home town), you can really prepare yourself for a comfortable retirement. Saving the equivalent of $900 of rent each month and putting it into VTSAX at the age of 22-24 nets you something in the range of $1.1 million dollars for retirement at age 60 at 10% interest. Just living at home for three years after your first job can put a million bucks into your retirement. Seems like a pretty sweet deal for just three years of your time. I'm not advocating living perpetually at home, although in some cases that might actually work, but living at home while you're still just 22 years old pays off when the money saved can compound into hundreds of thousands of dollars for doing nothing than living in your old room for a couple of years. Personally I would do it if I had a good relationship with my parents and wasn't addicted to partying or whatever. Being "straightedge" involuntarily seems like a small sacrifice for a million dollars.