---
date: "2019-06-03"
title: "#98 - Educational Costs in 2019 for CS Should Be on the Order of Hundreds of Dollars, Not Thousands"
ghissue: 82
---

If you are sort of oblivious to the power of the open source movement, then look no further than the fact that Microsoft is now an open source company. Most of their new products are open source licensed. If even Microsoft can embrace open source, you know that open source has become the defacto license for contemporary software. If you are not working with open source in 2019, you might just be a dinosaur.

One of those dinosaurs is academia. Despite MIT's OpenCourseWare platform being released in 2002 and having a few other colleges follow suit, there has been no widespread adoption of open source in colleges. If classes were truly open source, colleges would convert lecture halls into recording studios and livestream and archive almost all lectures made in them. Yet there are few colleges who build modern lecture halls to have their primary purpose to be a recording studio for immediate uploading onto YouTube. Recording lectures is still "too expensive," "too time consuming," "too intrusive." Nearly zero college classe are "flipped," in which the professor records their lectures in a digital recording studio (which can be watched by students any time on hopefully a free and open video hosting service like YouTube), while the classroom time is spend on discussion and socratic seminar instead of lecture. Both circumstances prioritize the digital recording studio videos published publically, whether individual or in a large lecture hall, but these course constructions are the exception rather than the rule. Colleges just aren't embracing open source. This makes sense when colleges still have market demand due to the only truly open source educational platforms being computer science focused, instead of other hard sciences or the liberal arts. If you want to study anything other than CS, you have to go to university, price be damned.

But if you are entering the field of computer science, there is a plethora of open source educational resources. These are usually free, and cover many years of top tier study. Take freeCodeCamp, for example, if you want to learn web development. If you want to study some proprietary CS video tutorials, these only cost a couple hundred of dollars a year. Mixing a cheap proprietary platform with free OER/OCW allows for in depth study for just a few hours of minimum wage work: the rest of your time can be spent studying towards that first programming job. That's not even including your public library's possible subscription to books and video platforms like Lynda, Treehouse, or Safari Books (not to mention their physical CS stacks). The fact is, you can cover most of your bases regarding learning with platforms that cost a couple of hundreds of dollars a year. If you can't afford that, you can focus on free resources. But all this is possible due to books and videos being open source licensed.

Books are rarely open source licensed, but I think that will change in the future. Again, it seems the only authors who open source their books are CS book writers. While I think eventually more and more authors will open source their books, for now I'm amazed by the multitudes of open source CS authors. With platforms like [EbookFoundation/free-programming-books](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books/blob/master/free-programming-books.md) these open source CS books can be catalogued and easily accessible for a modern implementation of a digital public library. These books require no monthly subscription fee. They are essential free college textbooks. In a world of $200 textbooks for intro college courses, they are a swift punch in the face. The question is, are there free lectures on the books which can supplement for the actual professor's lectures?

This is where you have to take a substitution. Instead of having lectures over a certain OER book ([though those certainly exist](https://cs61a.org/)), you have to fudge together usually an OCW lecture on a proprietary textbook while studying OER instead. It's a sacrifice but one that will change as colleges embrace OER textbooks. If they don't, they'll eventually get replaced by affordable CS platforms (especially when the cost of a single textbook for a semester-long class would cover a year of study on one of these platforms, not even considering tuition on top of it). Would you rather spend $200 on a single textbook for an intro class (this is a little more than how much Liang's Intro to Java textbook costs new, for example), or get a whole year of PluralSight/Lynda/Treehouse/SafariBooks? Books aren't that great versus a huge library of programming tutorials!

I just [created a repository that catalogs OCW that is based on a free OER textbook](https://github.com/HolmSchool/OCW-that-uses-OER). I imagine there will be few. This is a shame, and I'm hopeful this will change in the future as more OER is released. Perhaps if this repository and others like it become popular, there will be greater motivation for professors who make OCW to use OER.

Regardless, OER and OCW when mixed with affordable online learning platforms is a powerful combination that can suffice for modern training for just a few hundred dollars a year. Considering a single class at a public university that costs $1000 could fuel five years of learning on one of these platforms, it is almost absurd to assume colleges can compete with their course offerings. The thing that keeps people going to college, however, is the fear that they won't succeed as a programmer without a degree certificate. Fortunately the trend of open source becoming the dominant paradigm of computer science will most likely correspond with a lessening of the prerequisites for a junior developer job. The good news is that computer science jobs are going unfulfilled, and unemployment is at record lows, so the ball is in your court regarding getting a foot into the tech industry without a degree. Take your chances, but plan strategically so you will succeed: catalog your code on github, study what a good CS resume looks like, and study your ass off. Not getting a degree is not an excuse to study less: obviously you need to study even harder if you're not getting a certificate to remain competitive in the applicant pool. But in my opinion, saving money by learning online prepares you for a lot of success in your life if you focus on achieving frugality and financial independence while young, taking advantage of the fact that you won't have loans to pay off when young and can invest in index funds instead. I would much rather be financially independent than have a college degree in CS, and self-study of CS online is a great tactic.

The system is this: ubiquitous OCW, ubiquitous OER, ubiquitous public library resources, ubiquitous affordable proprietary learning platforms. The system lets you study your ass off every hour of the day for a couple hundreds of dollars a year. There's no dearth of study resources in the computer science, and people need to grok that going into debt to learn to program and the rudiments of CS just doesn't make any damn sense just for a paper certificate. Being financially independent is much more rewarding that having an expensive piece of paper. Especially when most programming jobs will pay tuition reimbursement! Teach yourself to program for a couple hundreds of dollars a year for four years, get a junior dev job, then get an undergraduate and graduate degree (paid for by your employer). Going into debt is risky and just a bit over-optimistic when your retirement returns for your 401k and IRA, if invested in index funds starting at age 22, has a 4200% return by the time you're 60. Spending that kind of money on a college degree when the OER/OCW system is so ubiquitous is a relic of the past. People will learn about the difficulties of CS degrees as financial independence / early retirement (FIRE) gains popularity among the CS crowd (as [Mr. Money Mustache already has](https://mrmoneymustache.com)) and the principals just become mainstream to computer scientists, since they fit so well together.

When online learning costs just a few hundred dollars a year and teaches roughly an equivalent amount when mixed with OER or public library books, the choice is obvious for computer scientists: Educational costs for learning computer science should never exceed more than a couple hundreds of dollars a year. You could probably even find an internship that pays for your PluralSight/Treehouse/Lynda/SafariBooks account on top of a hourly wage if you just ask and explain yourself. Companies get tax breaks for tuition reimbursement, so they usually offer some sort of benefits package for full time employees and even smaller gifts like PluralSight accounts to interns who don't qualify for benefits. Use their tax advantages to educate yourself so your resume is bulletproof from a young age. When coupled with zero debt, you'll find yourself in a decently paying junior dev job with your future education costs covered. Considering you've read Holm School and are savvy enough to know how to keep your educational costs to just a couple hundreds of dollars a year, let their benefits package be the "maximum" you're willing to spend on CS. You could totally splurge on things like a useless CS undergraduate degree! Why not? [Work your way to a CS degree](https://holm.school/work-your-way-out-of-your-public-university-career/), don't CS degree your way to work. The advantage is financial independence!








