---
date: "2019-06-01"
title: "#99 - The limitless ceiling of intellectual pursuit is a false hope"
ghissue: 80
---

[#99 of 100 Reasons Not To Go To College to Study Computer Science](https://holm.school/new-blog-series/)

Most smart people see college as their only hope of pursuing the intellectual life. This is because universities offer a million different graduate degrees that could sometimes occupy decades of time to achieve, and then after that is the promise to work at a university, where you could spend many more decades doing whatever you want under tenure. I am here to argue that this is a false hope that is a truly empty promise, and not a reason you should be willing to go tens/hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt at a young age.

If colleges truly cared about enabling you to pursue the intellectual life (for the rest of your life), which seems to be one of their main calling cards to smart kids who think they'll change the world with their inventions, then you wouldn't have to apply to graduate school. Just being accepted as an undergraduate would qualify you for the PhD track. But alas, to continue to graduate school you have to reapply to colleges, at which point your scholarships and funding are going to change. For some reason you even have to retake the SAT in the form of the GRE. Why in the world would you have to retake the SAT even after you've been selected to an undergraduate based on your scores. Is anything going to change? Are you smart at 18 but not smart at 22? Why can you be selected to do difficult academic work as an 18 but you have to reprove yourself at 22?

The simple answer is that by enforcing more hoops you have to jump through, colleges can make more money. The appearance of selectivity makes graduate school appear to be something prestigious, and colleges directly make money off notions of prestige. That's mostly how the private universities fill their endowment -- crafting ways to enhance and preserve their prestige. These GREs and graduate applications serve no purpose other than to filter out the students who are not wealthy from academia. If you believe that graduate school can be attended by nonwealthy students, you are truly delusional. Colleges barely give out wages or scholarships for graduate students, all but assuring the only people able to put 6-10 years of unpaid labor in pursuit of a PhD are those who are independently wealthy thanks to mom and dad. There is no reason to "cut" students out of graduate school. If universities truly desired the pursuit of scholarship and intellect, then every student accepted as an undergraduate would be able to pursue graduate study at the same institution after four years. But the hoops ensure that only the wealthy can continue on with academia.

This is more pronounced in liberal art departments, where most graduate students are trust fund socialists (lol) pursuing a career as a full time socialist in a liberal arts department after earning their degree. I'm not going to talk about that here. Instead, I want to argue that even in computer science, graduate school is still only for those independently wealthy. The filtering of poor students is a great way to preserve prestige, because "success" in the world is all but assured to kids who have wealthy parents who can pull strings to get their kid employed somewhere that pays well. If STEM jobs that pay well are only available to students who have graduate degrees, then it make sense that those who will be successful in getting those jobs will be students who have wealthy enough parents to fund a graduate school stint. You can see this in the recent bribery scandal. Wealthy parents will pay any amount to ensure their precious baby succeeds in academia. This obviously manifests itself in the way graduate school is functionally limited only to students with wealthy parents, who can pay for 10 years of volunteer labor (if not sometimes including actual tuition).

You might not believe me, but that's why I'm writing about academia. All your professors in nice private colleges will be people with PhD from nice private colleges. The way they were able to get those nice private college graduate degrees were because their parents were rich enough to pay for their graduate school. If you don't understand this, then it is likely you are going to be one of the middle class students who goes to a private college and then finds that their hopes of pursuing the "intellectual life" is promptly aborted by all those professors with nice private college graduate degrees. Those nice private college graduate degrees, which are required to teach at nice private colleges, are not going to be available to you. Either you'll be bad enough grades, you won't score high enough on the GRE, you won't be able to afford graduate school tuition plus rent, or you simply won't get accepted in lieu of a more wealthy applicant. You might go heavily into debt to attend an expensive college because you think you'll be able to study advanced topics that you can't get at other colleges, but if you aren't extremely wealthy you'll find a PhD impossible to get.

Colleges purport to be a place where you can pursue a lifetime of intellectual accomplishments. This isn't the case, and shouldn't be a reason that you're paying tuition and going into extreme debt at a young age. The life of the mind, when possible thanks to a private college graduate degree and securing a tenure track position, is so rare that you're practically gambling with vast amounts of some for what amounts to a pipe dream. If college were truly about training a kid for advanced study, they wouldn't cost anything if you're poor and they would allow graduate school to be immediately followed up with after undergrad. But they aren't, and it's setting you up to get burned if you're naive to think you can succeed in academia without great wealth. The sad truth is academia is only for wealthy families. Please don't think that you can sidestep this, this sad truth is true regardless of where you go. It permeates every level of academia, from school to actual jobs. Your graduate degree is just a certification that your parents are wealthy, it is not a certificate of accomplishment or originality or intelligence.

Of course, being a professor means you're super intelligent, right? Guess again. Now a days it is mostly a certificate that you're a trust fund socialist. Intelligence doesn't mean anything when graduate school is only available to the rich. Being a professor means your mom and dad were able to fund years of unemployment as well as excessive private school tuition. Again, I emphasize, if PhDs were actually a meritocracy you would be accepted into graduate school when you were accepted into your undergraduate university, and you'd have the total fee up front right then and there to comparison shop. The idea that graduate school has to be "earned" after undergraduate, which is also "earned", is just a farce that weirdly preserves society's impression of what is prestigious or not, while also ensuring that colleges make serious mooolah off everyone unaware of the truth.

Many smart poor or middle class kids think college is the only way they can spend their life pursuing science and academic inquiry. So they enroll in college STEM departments, paying outrageous tuition costs, only to find the only students that succeed in academia are kids of the rich. So they're filtered out of academia as soon as they achieve the academic level of study that could be accomplished for free at a public library. Instead of going to a public library or online using OER/OCW and learning to code for free, they believe that a long life of academic inquiry at the university lies ahead of them. Instead they get saddled with $60-240k worth of debt for a product/education that costs $0 at the public library. Colleges get rich while the majority of students suffer. Of course, they'll get bad grades throughout undergraduate, which they'll account to "just not getting computer science, I guess," but the truth is their grades reflect their mom and dad's wealth. Computer science is so easy it can be self-learned at a public library. You do not need to pay expensive tutors with PhDs from Ivy League schools to teach you how to code.

Of course, when you tell someone their best chance for success lies in spending two to four years at the public library learning how to code and then getting a junior dev job somewhere, they're going to tell you how much more enticing is the possibility of being a forever-academic at their chosen university. Sure, a life dedicated to being a thought leader certainly seems better than the assurance of a junior developer position. But the assurance of a successful career in academia is a pipe dream, you have a very low chance of getting one. Though "a junior dev job" isn't nearly as sexy as "being a professor at Harvard," it actually quite pratical, rewarding, and still holds quite a lot of potential for serious intellectual inquiry. I doubt anyone will believe me though, and so 18 year olds keep entering the meat grinder of academia in pursuit of CS degrees. I'd love to get paid to study computer science. But tell me, when was the last time you paid someone (who wasn't a relative) to study computer science? Probably never. And that's why your chances of getting paid to study computer science are similarly a pipe dream, and unrealistic, and not worth the massive student debt that comes when you gamble your retirement in turn for a shot at it.

Tell a kid to aim low, and you're accused of being a fascist. But tell them they'll be able to pursue science, in the most pure form, for the rest of their life, and then not deliver, and you're a "nonprofit." Give me a break. Academia only exists to feed off the culture of prestige that follows massive amounts of independent wealth. It is not meritocracy. Actually getting that junior dev position then working your way up the ranks is meritocracy, and probably the most realistic manifestation of what a meritocracy is and should be. But that's not what is perceived as a meritocracy these days. Instead, academia is viewed as the one true meritocracy. And academia pumps out propaganda that [coding jobs aren't meritocracies](https://postmeritocracy.org/) (lol) and instead you should just keep taking on those massive tuition fees without any means to pay for them as you pursue the life of the mindz0r.

Colleges aren't a limitless ceiling of intellectual pursuit. You won't keep rising through the ranks based on your hard work and great brain for the rest of your life, until you earn that Nobel you so richly deserve. You'll instead be shat out of the runnings as early as physically and emotionally possible, with zero refund on your student loans for all those false promised of PhDs and tenured jobs.

The sooner you realize when you're signing up for student loans, you intelligence isn't going to play any part in your resulting succeed, the more you stand to profit. I hope this website tells a bit of the truth behind academia, and you learn some meta-educational ways in which you can study undergraduate-level computer science for free. Though some might say, "I want to go past just undergraduate level, to a MASTERS and a PHD and BEYOND!", the chances are you won't get that opportunity anyway. It's easier just to work your butt off at the public library and secure a junior dev position for zero debt, than pursuing a false hope of limitless intellectual inquiry that the university falsely promises. I'm not even sure why, at this point, people would even morally respond to a system as corrupt as academia when the public library is free and available to anyone at any age and at any income level. Why people continue to choose the university, only to get burnt repeatedly, is beyond me. But then again, I did the same... but now I see that the public library is neutral good whereas the university is chaotic evil.

Don't gamble with vast sums of money as you pursuit the honeyed lies told by university that you'll easily become a graduate student if you attend their college, then work hard, etc. etc. It's actually just a rich clique, where you aren't invited but they'll still gladly take your money as you try in vain. If college actually gave a crap about training future leaders and thinkers, you'd be accepted into the PhD program when you applied as an undergraduate.

Of course, now with Library Genesis and Sci Hub even graduate-level intellectual pursuits can be attempted by anyone with an internet connection. Nothing prevents you from reading the latest research after work from your junior development job. You can still follow whatever computer science topic catches your fancy AFTER earning a steady paycheck. Don't think you can put the life of the mind before the paycheck, that's where you wind up with hundreds of thousands of dollars in student loans. I would suggest becoming financial independent by working your way up from a junior developer position, all while keeping a 50-70% savings rate and investing in tax-deferred index funds, and then becoming a full time researcher after retiring early in ten to twenty years. Nothing stands in your way doing that thanks to Sci-Hub and Library Genesis and the resources offered by your public library. That's true democratic education: debt-free and restrictionless, and actually earning a nice profit based on individual work and effort. The rest is false hope.



