---
date: "2019-01-27"
title: "Academia Degrees Are Only Valuable For Academia Jobs"
ghissue: 20
---

Part of my moving on from the liberal arts is a decision not to rely on university for education and jobs. I started studying towards a liberal arts degree in expectation that I would be a university professor, and if not that, then a high school teacher. Because there was an AP Art History course, I imagined schools would want to employ a high school teacher with an art history degree. That I knew was optimistic: you can't gain employment at the high school level if you only teach one to three courses each year. So I supplemented my education by taking humanities courses each year, so that I could either teach English courses or history courses. Everything seemed to be going swimmingly until my junior year of college, when the Chinese art history professor at my school failed to gain tenure and was replaced by another Chinese art history professor. Because I wanted to specialize in Chinese art history as an undergraduate, I obviously enrolled in those art history courses. What I soon learned was that what I had come to expect from Chinese art history courses was now replaced by a professor that taught literary theory as the primary texts to complement the art we were studying. That was fine with me, I had just spent the summer reading about the Russian formalists and was interested in delving more into literary theory. What I discovered was that professors that use literary theorists in their course wield an impossibly unjust wedge that can be employed to shut down an individual's research and progress in the liberal arts.

Literary theory is a nebulous field, although there are certainly oeuvres and canonical theorists like Foucault. The classes in Chinese art were now less about China and art, and more about excuses to read literary theorists. We would be assigned a book by a literary theorists, and then some powerpoints with images, possibly from a primary text, in which we were supposed to apply the literary theorist to the images. In short order, instead of research Chinese art we were now researching literary theorists, and the crux of our formerly art history essays became analysis of literary theorists. Or else French Marxist artists like the Situationists, a group of "artists" I spent months studying in a supposedly Chinese art history class. The primary texts weren't Chinese writings or scrolls, it was instead Marxists and literary theorists. What sucked about this was that when it came time to write essays, we were forced to incorporate these theorists both on our class essays and our major research essays like the junior qual and senior thesis. While it was unfortunate the focus of the Chinese art history classes were less on China and more on French theorists like Lacan, Debord, and Foucault, the hardest part was the grading of our essays.

It was almost like they expected us to enter college with a thorough and fluent understanding of literary theorists. Which is absurd, they simply aren't taught in high school (thank god). I would even say I was more acquainted with literary theorists than most students, because I champ debated for three years and was familiar with Foucault kritiks that teams would run all the time. Literary theory has a pretty big following in the champ debate circuit, and so when I was assigned to read literary theorists in college I simply viewed it as an opportunity to more thoroughly understand debate kritiks. Of course, having prior knowledge of this turned out not to help me at all in college (at least according to my grades). When I would try and write an essay about the assigned literary theorist for that month, my teacher would tell me I wasn't applying their theory correctly. When I had to incorporate literary theorists into my junior qual (ostensibly about Modern architecture), I was told that I was using two theorists that couldn't be used together. When I asked why, my professor simply stated, "I can't explain why, just believe me that you can't." It was absurd. I was being asked to rewrite a semester long junior qual in the final few weeks of the semester because I used together two literary theorists that apparently were mutually exclusive. Apparently there are little microschisms in literary theorists where one gang of literary theory conflicts with another gang of literary theory. You don't learn this in class, apparently it is something you learn in graduate school, and because I couldn't understand that level of literary theory yet, I was simply told that I couldn't, without explanation.

What I realized after I graduated was that literary theory was like a grand excuse to persecute students based on whim. If you didn't like a student, you could grade poorly their essay on arbitrary qualifiers that didn't even need to be explained (the professor, as the PhD holder, knew privileged knowledge that was just true, and didn't need to be explained). It was totally unbalanced: As just an acolyte of literary theory versus the years of graduate school professor, you would never know all the nuances of literary theorists and their turf wars to create an acceptable essay. Unfortunately my grades reflected not my ability in art history, but my ability in literary theory. And let me tell you, literary theory doesn't lend itself to ability. The text are dense, opaque, and verging on gibberish. Just read some Lacan: the man makes up words, employs vogue scientific terms in ways that supposedly elucidate psychoanalysis, and ultimately writes like someone that's had a stroke in terms of fluency and readability. Or better yet, try reading Bourdieu: I was forced, at my department's decision, to incorporate Bourdieu as the primary text for my senior thesis even though I wanted to study art history, not sociology. Bourdieu is another shitty writer: The fucker writes paragraph long sentences that half the time you think the translator sucks, but then you realize it doesn't make any more sense in French. The guy just bloviates about class while writing texts that PhD candidates can feel like their super smart for having "read" and "understood," when in fact the text is gibberish and written incomprehensibly. I once brought up this criticism of literary theorists on reddit one time, and I was told I was simply too stupid to understand literary theory. And that basically sums up my college experience with literary theory: My professors told me I was too stupid to understand literary theory, and by fiat art history.

In my sophomore year I took a Northern Renaissance art class wherein we read an essay by an art history who starts every chapter of his book with a quote from Derrida. The essay was basically a critique of Panofsky and his "Hidden Symbolism" theory. I happen to like Panofsky and the essay basically sucked so I didn't agree in class that "Hidden Symbolism" was pwned by this literary theorist art historian. But, at the conclusion of class, my professor asked, "Who here still doesn't believe in Hidden Symbolism?" I shook my head and made a disgusted face. My professor replied, "Well you'd better!" and class was over. There was no room for dissenting opinion. That's basically my experience with Derrida and his ilk: You either believe in it, or your life in the liberal arts will be made hell. And my life was made hell. I flunked out that semester, probably because my mental illness was having its onset, and probably because my professor, who taught two of my classes that semester, disliked me. Of course, in art history classes you're the only male in the class, so sometimes you just feel like the professors have it out for you because they view you as invading their turf and want to prove that you're dumber than the women because of institutional misogyny in the art history field. It's ironic that all the literary theorists you read are male, yet as a male in an art history class you experience a bit of paranoia on the professors part, and they try and understand why a man is interested in art history in this day and age where art history students are overwhelmingly female. Though I do have a mental illness that affected my ability to write well when the age of onset correlated with my entry to college, I don't think that completely explains the poor grades I received in art history classes with a strong literary theory component. I was utterly frustrated, at that time I was interested in literary theory, so I couldn't understand why my essays that used literary theory were being rejected and every single one was requiring a rewrite in a time frame that was impossible given my work load.

I know realize that literary theory is a scam and hot air. I have read books like Higher Superstition, Intellectual Impostors, and Pinker's Blank Slate that explain that postmodernism is a masturbatory wank-fest by nihilistic professors who are jaded they spent years in graduate school reading utter nonsense like Nietzsche. Sorry, Deleuze and Guattari, schizophrenia isn't caused by capitalism. It's caused by genes. Sorry, Lacan, imaginary numbers don't explain the id. Science isn't compatible with psychoanalysis. Sorry, Freud, mental illness isn't caused by Oedipus Complex, it's caused by genes. Sorry, Foucault, psychiatry isn't oppressive but actually saves people with mental illness' lives. Sorry, Butler, gender isn't a performance, it's caused by genes. It's all a bunch of anti-science bullshit that frankly wastes a lot of people's time and money, and I'm not surprised it leads to a crappy life for people who teach it and people who are forced to study it. Hell, I wasn't even forced to study it, I voluntarily took a literary theory class in college (I got a C-, laugh out loud), and it still wasn't enough to get through the door of the heavily gate-kept literary theory intelligentsia. I graduated second in my high school class, and began reading Michael Crichton novels in fourth grade, so being told I'm too stupid to understand books is a pretty crass reaction to someone calling the bluff that is Postmodernism. Maybe people in America aren't fans of Marxism, and feeding Marxism in unrelated classes like Art History is a huge waste of everyone's time and downright cultish. Perhaps requiring every art history essay to incorporate a literary theorist is a huge waste of everyone's time and downright cultish. Perhaps Postmodernism is bullshit, and capitalism isn't that big of a deal. Maybe you guys with PhDs should stop reading French theorists and take some science classes instead and learn some real theory. Maybe you can stop taking over awesome disciplines like art history with faddish gibberish that you can fail the students you don't like unjustly on made-up, inexplicable pretenses.

And so I have to ask, why in the world anyone would take liberal arts classes if that's the circumstances of the field. If it takes a PhD to understand literary theory, why are college-age students being force fed literary theorists, and then failing them because they "don't understand the theory." It seems like a huge way for some rich nerds to feel some shallow self-confidence and superiority. And nerds they are: If you seriously would rather study French theory instead of science, there's something screwed up in your head. Liberal arts should constantly be apologizing for taking students away from science classes. The departmental requirements that demand liberal arts classes even for science majors are a crime against humanity, especially when upper level classes are just an excuse to push literary theory and Marxism. To require scientists to study literary theory is the most laughable absurdity of college that I can visualize. Smart kids being forced to read brain-dead, washed-up writers (excuse me, "theorists") from the sixties at high costs is indefensible. Liberal arts departments should apologize, and then seriously reconsider who they employ. Even kids who are legitimately interested in the liberal arts get screwed and played for their cash, as instead of majoring in a department instead major in Foucault. God help them when they try and take their mastery of Foucault into the real world, and they find the only career path for them is graduate school and a PhD, in order to be an adjunct professor. The university is basically a literary theory factory, and nothing in the near future will change it. That's why I'm never entering a graduate program in art history, and that's why I promote computer scientists to study outside of the boundaries of the university, because even when you are purchasing computer science classes, you are still paying for literary theory in other departments. These theorists, if they wrote today in the modern era on a YouTube channel, would be classified as conspiracy theorists at best and slobbering Marxists at worst. They would be relegated to the left-wing version of GamerGaters. No one would take them seriously. But through the enigma of propaganda and cultish devotion to the cause, professors dole out these books left and right on liberal arts syllabi. There's no escaping them, and there's no room for dissent or disbelief without being labelled a Nazi sympathizer. Considering I'm a liberal,  I find Marxist Postmodernists to be the very definition of deplorables. Yet either you play their game or your career in the liberal arts is over.

So what's the point of going to a university if you don't expect to work in a university? And why in the world would anyone want to work in a university anyway? When the liberal arts is so broken, student loans for tuition cause student debt crisis, and the only jobs for students with liberal arts degrees are as teaching assistants or adjunct professors. The university is a lost cause without major reform, but the social justice warrior ethos of many millennials is feeding them straight from tumblr into PhD programs in the liberal arts. As long as the SJWs (who are inevitably rich and white) are paying for liberal arts curriculums heavily curated with literary theorists, nothing will change. They will hire other literary theory specialists, and they will continue to teach literary theory in their future classes as adjunct professors. And they will be brainwashed into believing what they are doing is just and right. Anyone who questions their dogma will be flunked out, a failure who couldn't chew the bit of social justice as defined by rich white and male (with PhDs no less) French theorists.

If you are a computer scientist, you should seriously consider boycotting the university that so exploits people interested in the liberal arts. Though liberal arts, as taught today, helps no one in getting a job, they still pay the same tuition price as you the computer science student pays. That's basically a scam and science department staff earn their salaries on the backs of liberal arts students who pay the same price for a worthless piece of paper as compared to your computer science degree. If you want to work at a university as a professor of Computer Science, you should seriously take a stand against postmodernism and insist that you work as a professor only when the liberal arts departments are cleared of literary theory curricula. And if you don't even want to be a professor, why even go to university in the first place, when it costs so much and can be learned for free on the internet? The only value of a university degree versus actual skill is just for a career in academia, where such a degree is required. Computer science jobs don't require a degree, so unless you can afford public university why not study on your own with OER or Lynda/Treehouse/PluralSight? People are repeatedly going broke or into debt in order to fulfill the quest of having a university degree, and even when they get there they discover that the curriculum is 100% Foucault and Bourdieu. Unfortunately there isn't a refund available if you disagree with the theory that schizophrenia is caused by capitalism. You are the sucker, left paying for such trash with no rebate. And when you can't find a job, those professors vanish into thin air. Because the only purpose of a university degree is for a job in university, and if you search outside of university for a job you are a failure that deserves no support (and it just proves how bad of a student you were, not cut out for a PhD program). Because apparently there are jobs at the end of a PhD track (hint: there are not, just like there aren't any at the end of the bachelor's track). It's all a scam and exploitative as hell. When you go to university you are vouching for such snake oil, even in a science department, and voting with your dollars for postmodernism versus science. I'm firmly team science, and as such will never go back to university even if I want a career as an art historian (I don't, I'm happy as a computer scientist). Even for computer science. Never university.

Unfortunately such faddishness doesn't seem to be going anywhere, even with the wild success of anti-postmodernists like Jordan Peterson. When the affinity for the sixties finally wears off in a few decades, people will wonder what the hell literary theorists and liberal arts professors were smoking to believe such trash. But until then, university is a lost cause. Find your happiness in free open education, for both the sciences and the liberal arts. Grievance studies professors can find another sucker to pay for theirs studies of Marxist deplorables.