---
date: "2019-05-18"
title: "My advice to people considering a liberal arts degree: Adjust to reality"
ghissue: 68
---

"Should I get a liberal arts degree?" It's a good question it seems too few 18 years olds are willing to ask and assess. Not only is there the opportunity cost of not getting a STEM degree in terms of time used and utility, but there's the additional question of why a liberal arts degree costs as much as those STEM degrees. If class costs are not ranked according to utility to future careers, then I think it's safe to say a good barometer for whether you should major in the humanities is whether liberal arts courses are cheaper than STEM courses. Because this isn't the case in 100% of universities, the signs point to one conclusion: Don't major in the humanities, major instead in computer science. As you know I go so far as to say don't major in CS unless it's affordable, you won't go into debt, or you get a full ride, especially when there are so many free ways to learn to program on Github, YouTube, OpenCourseWare, OER, and public libraries.

Simply put, in my experience as a thirty four year old with a liberal arts degree from a private university working as a full stack web developer, it is not worth paying real, non-bankruptcy voidable money, to read old, public domain books that have been thoroughly written about and analysed in their hundreds or thousands of years of existance. It, in other words, is not exactly cutting edge. What would "the cutting edge" in the humanities even look like? Ponder that question long and hard before embarking on a liberal arts degree. What is the cutting edge of the humanities? I can only conclude that the cutting edge of the liberal arts degree is learning to program, or majoring in CS. There are a few reasons, notably that you can still operate as a humanist with a CS degree, and also that you can serve a needed role as a programmer for many digital archives and apps related to the liberal arts. What is not needed in this world is more essays about public domain books written 300 years ago. That's not the cutting edge, and there's a lot of propaganda created related to current events that are made from a combination of old texts with analysis that comes from having an axe to grind. The funny thing is, liberal arts departments try to claim that this is actually one of the highlights of the humanities, 'how useful' the classics are regarding current events. Don't buy it. It's marketing and books should be analyzed in their historical contexts, not extrapolated for every single whim that fancies a college professor regarding the current president, war, or legislation. It's no wonder that the liberal arts department are currently pushing the view that there is no truth in the world, that everything is subjective, in order to justify their latest word salad of an essay using their area of study.

A prospective liberal arts major must separate from the belief that you have to pay money as a prerequisite to flaunt your dedication to the humanities. Many precocious readers are a little too endeared with the marketing message that spending a lot of money on books is a sign you're a read die hard, one of the most enamored person with reading and the liberal arts. This is propaganda created by colleges, sending the message that only people that pay exhorbitant amounts of money on tuition and books will be employed, as they are the true evangelists for the humanities. Going into debt is a life changing decision. It negatively impacts you and your future, no matter what the admission department of the university wants you to believe. Student debt is non-bankruptable, and usually much higher than the alternative cost of online (non-university) self education. Debt at a young age compounds into exorbitant sums over the decades -- as much cost as what you would have earned investing the money instead at a young age -- and debt at an early age is dangerous. Don't believe that you have to exemplify yourself as a spend thrift, obsessed with books and learning, in order to have a future as a humanist.

Look towards a future without the university. Why would you want to work there anyway as a professor when universities are causing some of the greatest harm to people? Tuition debt is exorbitant, and many people are in a life long crisis caused by going to college. Do you really think college is nonprofit? Don't believe everything you read on the internet. It is an exploitative industry relying on marketing and brainwashing to make a buck. The unfortunate risk of liberal arts degrees is that you're only utility of the degree is as a college professors, so student never critically examine the university, instead almost pledging undying admiration for the university because it encapsulates their only future. If your only career future relied on the university, would you criticize its economic model? Probably not. In fact, you'd talk about how the university is the only place to grow and develop into a humanist, so just go $80,000 dollars in debt for a private liberal arts education, it's the only thing that will develop you into a full and well rounded human. I doubt you need to go in debt in order to become a well rounded person.

University is not the cradle of the humanities, as it is protrayed. As I explained in my last post, in order to succeed in the current liberal arts departments as they are constituted and staffed, you must worship at the altar of marxism or you're disbarred. Even though marxism is anti-enlightenment, anti-democracy, anti-free markets, and anti-liberalism, almost every professor is a marxist at university and they are strict gatekeepers of their students. You either must comply with their demand to incorporate marxist literary theorists in every piece of research you conduct, or else you will be prevented from studying and researching. Either through expellation through poor grades or social blackmail and ostracism. It's a pretty crappy system, and if you need more information about the current state of liberal arts department I recommend "Higher Superstition" by Gross and Levitt, and three books by Steven Pinker: "Blank Slate," "Enlightenment Now," and "Better Angels of Our Nature."

There are no jobs except being a high school teacher at the end of a liberal arts bachelors degree pipeline. Why pay money to read public domain books for no job? Why would you ever go into debt when there's no payoff or investment involved? You're basically a gambler addicted to playing, even with mounting losses and piss poor odds. Even though you can read every book on every liberal arts syllabus for free through your public library or online ebook archive, people still pay money. What you should do is get an affordable CS degree if you're interested in the humanities, and then go work for a public library, public archive, museum, nonprofit Edtech, or ebook repository of open source books, and pursue the humanities in your programming job. There are myriad of ways to promote the liberal arts, humanities, and reading in a programming jobs. Books are going to be 100% digital in the future. Get an affordable CS degree or study on your own and help with that transition.

Don't think just because you get a STEM degree, you're barred from the humanities. There are many ways to pursue reading even whie studying CS. As Alan Sokal wrote (I cant find the exact text so I'm paraphrasing, whose books I highly recommend reading before you go into a liberal arts degree), if tomorrow every liberal arts professor disappeared, then STEM professors would have no problem standing in for them in their classrooms, but if the opposite case happened, liberal arts professors could never conduct a STEM lesson. This is a hyperbole, of course, but there is a great and fundamental truth in it. Scientists are humanists and well read in the classics too. There is nothing that a liberal arts degree affords you that a STEM degree couldn't. You aren't banned from thinking about fiction just because you got a practical and useful STEM degree.

Another think to ponder is why there are so few open source liberal arts books. If you need to read a book for free and it's in the humanities, you probably have to rely on Library Genesis. The humanities are not as open minded or forward thinking as a community as they protray themselves to be. The dearth of open source books is a calling card for the low utility of a liberal arts degree: it doesn't understand the future, nor does it actively participate. Try and find an open source liberal arts book and you're probably not going to find much. This should be a realistic gauge of their understanding of the future of the world and the internet. They are marxist and as a result don't participate in open source technology, an essentially free-market concept and movement. As a result their relevancy of the current community will fade while the people that do participate in open source humanities will thrive in the future. Few are even conscious of what open source is. Even though open source is the future for computer technology, liberal arts professors are adamant that they preserve full copyright on their works and productions. This is clueless, and shows how little humanities professors understand the world in their secluded bubble of marxist literary theory. Good luck in your future endeavors, you're going to need it while computer scientists that work in open source thrive.

You can promote digital literacy with a CS degree. Just because there's an increasing role of free video in the learning environment doesn't mean that reading is dead. Many people enjoy reading books on their kindle and ipad, and reading isn't going anywhere. What's going somewhere is the difficulty in obtaining deadwood copies of books, either due to their cost or their rarity. With a CS degree you can be designing the future of reading, instead of insisting that everyone continue to use deadwood editions, naive about technology and fetishizing a physical book. Many video focused EdTech companies still need digital books, and digital books are still an effective means of teaching. Look at the [EbookFoundation](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books/blob/master/free-programming-books.md) github repository as an example of what the future of reading will look like.

You should OpenCourseWare your passion. This is a widely available free medium of studying college level texts and subjects for free. Many schools focus on liberal arts OpenCourseWare, either putting them on YouTube or as a Podcast. Many public libraries now subscribe to Kanopy or Hoopla, which has a collection of The Teaching Company lectures on science and the humanities. There will be a ubiquity of liberal arts lecture for free online in the future, but the current day has many as well. You should, however, follow not your passions but pursue utility. Read Cal Newport's book "So Good They Can't Ignore You" about the folly of pursuing your passions. A computer science degree will provide you with a paying job for life, while following your passion of reading books all the time will land you a job at Starbucks for minimum wage and no benefits. Cal Newport explains how many people write about the importance of following your passions, but to ignore that advice. Learning to code will ensure you a position of the value for the future, yet a liberal arts degree probably won't.

If you don't know what literary theory is, it's a good reason not to get a liberal arts major. Literary theory is the darling of liberal arts departments, just like it is the darling of the championship debate circuit in high school. Literary theory says that their is no intention behind the author's creative act, and that all truth is subjective. Again, I recommend the book "Higher Superstition" if you haven't read it. Unfortunately, even though literary theory is garbage and consists largely of large expensive texts that read like they've been written by a schizophrenic experiencing pscyhosis, word salad and all, literary theory will become your main body of reading and research in the humanities department. It is a waste of time and money, and no body will ever recompensation you for the lost hours reading required word salad. For this reason there is very low utility in a liberal arts degree even if you like the liberal arts. Literary theory is also strongly against the Enlightenment, and takes special pleasure in bloviating about the harms the world has incurred as a result of the Enlightenment. This is what you learn in the humanities, I really wish I were joking. It's such a sham, and being forced to read that for tens of thousands of dollars is truly an exercise in exploitation.

Liberal arts degree demand that you go to a prestigious private university in order to score whatever open positions for employment are available in the future. Unfortunately these private universities cost a bundle. Being forced to go tens if not hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt just to score a low paying humanities job really should make you ponder about the entire "system," especially with the astronomic student debt crisis America is experiencing. Why wind up in debt just for a low salary at just a few positions? Fortunately a community college degree, even being self taught, is sufficient for an entry level programming job. Programming is much more of a meritocracy instead of an elitism. You don't need to have a presitigious degree just to land an entry level job. There are millions of open software positions, and competition is low. Being a programmer is a great way to ensure that you're fruitfully employed.

I suggest anyone considering a liberal arts degree read the ["100 Reasons Not to Go to Grad School"](http://100rsns.blogspot.com/) blog in its entirity. While the blog was written under the auspices of forewarning against going to grad schoool in the humanities, it actually fittingly applies to an undergraduate degree too. An undergraduate degree in the liberal arts probably shouldn't be pursued, when you can read public domain books free online or through your public library.

CS is a trade. It can be learned free through your public library's Lynda.com subscription. Of course, lynda.com doesn't teach liberal arts topics on their website, because there is little utility when all that is really needed in order to learn is to read public domain books. The fact that Lynda doesn't teach liberal arts courses (excluding studio art) should be a harbinger of their utility. It is very low. Stick with the trades. Rely on the Lynda.com sniff test: "If it isn't taught on Lynda, it's probably not worth tens of thousands of dollars of debt to study."

A sad truth about studying studio art in college is that their studio equipment is usually far beyond what you'll be able to afford as a liberal arts major after college. I experienced this myself when I studied Max/MSP for three years in college, but after graduating couldn't even afford to purchase it myself for so many years that I eventually just forgot about even pursuing that activity. Liberal arts degrees pay so poorly that you'll never be able to own the computers, software, hardware, and cameras that are available at your university. The same is true for research. There is a high probability you'll be working as a barista with a liberal arts degree, at which point you can't even afford to buy the books necessary to read about the liberal arts. It's a closed system and the free radicals are building: You'll exclusively learn how to use equipment you yourself will never own. It's a waste of time. In my case, I should have been studying the open source version. Anything else was a waste of time. You must use open source software in order to keep your costs down and ensure you can keep producing even if the economy crashes, god forbid. This is true in equipment costs, as well as trajectories of study and what your learn about in your free time. You can't afford what the university computer labs have installed on them. Don't put your hope in being able to keep working with what you're learning in lab. You probably won't have access to them after graduating, at which point your skills will be useless and you will have wasted your time, and sealed yourself off from having a future in your career.

A CS degree is the index funds of college majors. What do I mean? Well, liberal arts degrees are a bad gamble, they are like investing in individual stock. What are the chances you'll be Warren Buffet? Sure, there's a possibility, but the chances are essentially zero. What are the chances you'll be a professor? Sure, there's a chance, but probably near zero. A CS degree matches the market, i.e. the real and profitable market for programmers, without the false hope of outperforming the market (and at a very high cost of an actively managed mutual fund). The odds aren't in your favor. You're better off "being bland" and going with a CS degree, which will find your much better employment possibilities, at the cost of not "winning big" with a job as a professor. Go with probability, not possibility

If you are concerned you won't be able to write often without a college trajectory, create a blog instead. You should even code it yourself with Gatsby, just like I did here. Make YouTubes. Do everything you would do in college for free on the internet. You'll be practicing your writing while gathering an audience. Just because you don't get a liberal arts degree doesn't mean you can't grow as a writer. You might even discover how difficult it is to monetize your online website for your digital art. It's really hard! That's just an example of how difficult it is to succeed with a liberal arts degree. In the age of the internet and free digital content, making money off writing is really really hard! For example, I composed electronic music for three years and didn't make a single cent. There is no money in it, so I gave it up. Experiencing this for free through the internet, not at the burden of tens of thousands of dollars of tuition expenses, is a good lesson everyone should have. You should read Negativland's essay on the public domain linked to in the public domain banner at the bottom of this website. It explains how the internet is making it hard to make money off writing and art and music. Instead of being frustrated, and buying into the notion that you need a presitigious private liberal arts degree to actually succeed, you should embrace this notion and get on board with technology. How do you make money? Hint: Side hustle (if not main hustle) as a computer programmer! It takes just two years of intense study of computer science in order to land a developer job. You can then focus the entire rest of your life on the humanities with your free time after work. With a computer science degree, you even stand the chance of retiring early as Mr. Money Mustache did! Think about how much you'll be able to write or create art then! You might even like programmig so much you give up on your artist dreams and instead delve into CS full time.

I no longer pay for books. I now rely on public libraries available on the internet such as Sci Hub and Library Genesis and archive.org. I no longer need to rely on a university's library stack. Hence, I no longer need to attend univerity in order to study what I need to learn. I don't even go to the public library anymore, because their digital stack is sufficient and Library Genesis usually has me covered anyway. College university stacks are silly anyway, since they are only for 18-22 year olds. It's like a club or bar for university age students anyway, it's not serving a role as an institute of public learning for the community. Private colleges usually lock their library doors anyway! "Paying students only!" What a waste of resources. Stick with Library Genesis and never pay for a book again. This should also be a good clue about the future of books: There won't be much money in them anymore, just like digital music. People will still read, probably more than they every have, but they won't be paying for the books, or at most $15 a month!

Humanities syllabi are often archived online from good universities. There is nothing that prevents you from reading each and every one of those books on your own. You can use Library Genesis to read the books or Sci Hub to get the journal articles. Probably most of the books are also available at your public library. A really good plan for someone interested in the humanities is to work as a programmer, and then read Hum books at night. This is probably the threshhold for pleasure anyway. I have to say, as someone that got a liberal arts degree, the curriculum in non-Great Books courses really sucked the fun out of my interest in the arts. Some of these upper level art history courses are nothing but wacko literary theory, and it is just a total pleasure suck. You'll dread the reading, dread the essays, dread the conferences, and dread the curriculum. Unfortunately, it's totally mandatory as a university student. Stick to reading syllabi at night after work and you'll be able to skip the word salad literary theory, the anti-Enlightenment marxist trash, and the dreadful maoist postmodernism and just read the classic books and subjects, which is where the fun is. Major in a liberal arts and you might come out of the program hating the subject (or at least the academic implementation of it). Just a warning before plunking down $60,000.

There is no future in anticapitalism. A surprisingly large proportion of what you study in upper level liberal arts courses is anticapitalist authors, artists, philosophers, and theorists. What a huge ass waste of time. If you're anticapitalist, I understand -- punk is pretty cool and some zines are really helpful. But if you study liberalism as a movement that came out of the Enlightenment, because eventually you're going to have to put on your big boy shoes and stop reading zines and listening to anarcho-punk and start reading Enlightenment literature, you'll find most of the conveniences of modernity like free speech and technology are a result of science and free markets. You might think this is optional, but really it isn't. Promoting an anticapitalist message is free speech, I understand, so if you want to spend your time doing that, go ahead. But I have to laugh at the prospects of spending $60,000 in four years reading anticapitalist theory. How is it anticapitalist to come out with an academic degree, or even to spend money on tuition? Unfortunately after the 90's pop punk explosion, university professors learned that if they embrace punk aesthetics (even, as Crass says, with their "deep understanding and intelligent looks"), they'll really draw in a lot of kids and make them feel really good about themselves when they spend time studying punk topics, as if it were academic research. But anticapitalism is basically a cult, it's violent and has no future as a philosophy. Most of the modern world is a liberal democracy and punk just isn't going to overthrow the new world order any time soon. I agree with the Crass song "Bloody Revolutions" that most anticapitalists are just bootjacked thugs looking to shoot some people with an excuse for righteousness. If you preach revolution, you're basically taking on the Enlightenment as some sort of cult figure that will kill for some UFO-Comet "Revolution" that will supposedly make things better for poor people. The irony of course is that most marxist you meet in university are extremely wealthy, "trustfund marxists", and in my opinion anticapitalism is a sign of wealth and privilege. Basically their parents can pay for their anarcho lifestyle, where they can't maintain a job but that's fine since they were financially independent at birth thanks to daddy's pension. Anticapitalism should be countered with reading Steven Pinker's "Enlightenment Now" and "Better Angels of Our Nature", as proposed by this [former radical](https://quillette.com/2018/12/11/sad-radicals/). Sure, when you're indebted to radicalness, paying for all those expensive anarchist books, you're going to be resistant to leaving the cult. But there's a lot of benefits to not being in a cult. Liberal art departments, whether a marxist tilt or an anarchist tilt, have no qualms about preaching a cult theory. Anticapitalism failed, that's the message of the 20th century, and if you're still holding on to marxist or anarchist theory in 2019 you're probably a tad mentally ill (who are very often preyed upon by cults) and need to read a true humanities and great books curriculum instead of fringe anarchists, to learn about liberal democracy and their concomitant free markets. Reading about cults, especially the violent ones, will probably help too.

The same goes for luddism. While you don't need to subscribe to every new social media or app coming out of silicon valley, it's a huge waste of time to promote antitechnology. Unfortunately for the privileged majority in university who bloviate about the folly of modern technology, they live their plush lives in academia while Africans who lacked modern medicine now have cures for disease. Luddism is so damn hilarious to me, and reeks of truthfund marxism as a privileged lifestyle. You're a humanist, not a damn cult leader. Doesn't mean you're not a digital minimalist, but it doesn't mean you need to drool over Zerzan and green anarchism and promote the eradication of modern medicine as a means of depopulating earth. Unfortunately this type of trash exists in academia, and it's just so sad and you wonder what type of undiagnosed mental illness these fellows have. I don't blame them for having rituals that don't involve computers, sure, books are pretty nice, but to try to use their positions in academia to brainwash kids to join ELF or ALF or something is pretty malignant. Technology is the best possible answer to our environmental problems. Most people in the liberal arts are anti Nuclear technology, and that's just a demonstrable litmus test about how clueless and naive these people are. I think most liberal arts professors excelled to the point where they could score liberal arts teaching positions because they never spent a second studying science. Yet, of course, in true Dunning Kruger effect, they view themselves as experts in modern technology and it's voluminous ills. If this is the type of person you want to support financially and spiritually, then go right ahead, get a liberal arts degree. But if you think these people should go back to college and major in a STEM field to actually contribute to society, then skip the liberal arts degree. Luddism is a huge waste of time, but fully expect it to taint everything you read in a liberal arts curriculum. It's either luddite or anticapitalism, and the true cost is your tuition and time. Might as well roll down the window and throw $100 bills on the highway (highways and cars, of course, are evil, and should be sabotaged). The irony that modern art was created on the back of advances in technology (optics, material science, math, globalization), is completely lost on these professors.

Liberal arts degrees grow more painful as the amount of time you invest in it increases. Whereas reading the classics is a great use of free time after work, if you take on the liberal arts as a career you will find that "advanced" topics are usually fringe and cult and mumbo jumbo. The Sokal Squared hoax sort of demonstrated this, that the sort of academic journals that are required to be published in to score tenure are just totally deranged and out of touch with reality. Literary theory is "advanced" in the humanities, and you'll have to waste your time reading these nutjobs in order to be considered adept at your job. This totally sucks and makes you feel like committing suicide. That this is the reward for your time and effort is like probably one of the most comedic tragedies of a liberal arts degree. They don't tell you this when you sign up. Feeling like your job is run and dictated by the lunatics in the asylum is really damn morally degrading. Fortunately computer science is nothing like this. The more advanced and skilled your become in your training, the more awesome and world changing shit you can build. Instead of just settling for a life of "l1t3r4ry 7h30ry" and "p057m0d3rn15m", you're actually an engineer that is rewarded for skill instead of penalized and forced into a world of suck. Your effort is paid off, and you'll be employable at technology institutes around the world. Of course, your liberal arts professors will tell you this is a horrible thing, since technology is going to destroy civilization, but that is probably less a case of Cassandraism and more a case of untreated borderline personality disorder. Working at a technology company is demanding, and so you'll be pushed to keep studying and creating. This is a great feeling, learning and producing technology instead of reading French marxists as your full time job. Talk about something that makes your soul feel good. Maybe skill should be rewarded instead of snuffed? Maybe time is precious and wasting young kids' time just to collect that 1337 tuition cash every half year in "exchange" for some pomo isn't a virtuous career afterall. Seriously, if you're a humanist, it's not surprising that anti-Humanist careers in an anti-humanist think tank aren't in the least bit edifying. Unfortunately most kids don't understand that liberal arts departments are actually anti-humanism, since they use to be the cradle of humanism before pomo and Marx and that sort of philosophy is sub rosa to talk about in public and taught behind closed doors where students are sworn to secrecy and not tell their parents that they're reading pulp trash, so they are ultimately suckered out of their tuition lunch money by the playground bully professor and deposited at the curb post-graduation, where the real world sinks in. The real world, of course, is a liberal democracy. Unless you've been trained by Russian double agents to be a spy for communism in order to wreck liberal democracies. But that would NEVER happen in an American university, riiiiiight? *logs onto facebook, the most popular website in the world*

Be optimistic. Most decisions made related to the humanities come from a position of pessimism from the future. Right now railing about AI is all the rage, in the past it was nuclear power, etc. Fortunately, the future is going to be awesome. The world is going digital and most everything that you use to spend a lot of money on is going to be automated and a fraction of the cost you used to pay. Education will be free online, medicine and cures for diseases are going to be ubiquitous, mental illness is going to be eradicated, animal rights will grow, entertainment is going to be a few dollars a month. Technology is going to solve the problem of climate change. And democracy will flourish, replacing the oppressive theocracies and monarchies. Wars will become rare, and lifespans will increase measurably, allowing for increased compounding interest which will ensure a prosperous life and retirement for most. I'm not being naive, if you want the evidence you can read Enlightenment Now. Unfortunately the mainstream belief in the humanities is that civilization is doomed (which might be a good thing? I forget if civilization is good or bad for the planet this week. Just kidding). The economy is on the verge of collapsing because of Republican control, etc. This is the kind of Berniebro stuff that makes it seem like Life In America is just the worst, and it's Only Going to Get Worse. Pessimism in the humanities takes a multitude of forms, whether it's anticapitalism or antinuclear power or just antitechnology. If you want to fill your life with pessimistic downers, then that's your perogative. But if you think America, rather than being the c0l0ni4l157 p47r14rchY h3g3m0n sUrv31ll4n3, is actually pretty rad and that those founding fathers sure knew how to roll, then maybe skip the liberal arts degree. You'll save some cash, and your time (and probably your optimism for life too).

Have confidence that you will succeed without a liberal arts degree, both as a human, an intellect, and for your career. This might not have been the case for our predecessors, where a college degree was essential, and the liberal arts where the sort of slacker answer to being too lazy to study a STEM major. Unfortunately, the liberal arts departments are now kooky as hell after postmodernism's influence. The 80s where a perfect storm for liberal arts departments in America. The boomers never experienced anything like we have to face in the humanities. The professors now are anticapitalist postmodernists, and it's a good decision to opt out of their curriculum. Boomers don't understand that, they're too busy to read books about the current state of the university or the outrageous tuition costs, so they think a bachelor's degree is still a sure bet. Well, they're retired and most companies are now technology companies, so the utility of their liberal arts degrees have been replaced with the utility of learning how to program. Instead of having a degree, the new ticket into scoring a job is whether or not you can program. The appropriate response would be to save the liberal arts for your free time in the evening after a long day of studying programming and computers, as a sort of relaxation and mind-edifying recreation. But to spend 12 hours a day studying the humanities instead of learning how to program would be as insane as a Boomer not having a degree: What were you thinking? Learning to program costs like $300 a year (Treehouse), or else free (freeCodeCamp). Wasting your money on a liberal arts degree is like gross negligence, I don't know how you expect to be employed in the technological world we're creating when you didn't learn to program when you were 18 and instead spent all your free time reading the classics. The classics are good, but not THAT good. Not enough to destine yourself to a lifetime of pain and suffering and ostracism. Face reality: Programming is the modern Great Books curriculum, and SHOULD be taught to all freshman. If they're not on board with this necessity at the school you're considering going to, then you should probably save your money and enroll in Treehouse or FreeCodeCamp. Modernity changes, but the creation of computers was like the invention of writing by the Mesopotamians and you're digging your head into the sand if you don't want to learn writing in 2000 BCE. It is the future, trust me! Writing is going to improve the world in ways incomprehensible. The same is true for computers. Computers are only 100 years old. Think about writing only being 100 years old. Think about the prospect and bright future for humanity on the basis of this one invention. Think about the improvements from 2000BCE and 2019CE and just marvel at what writing enabled us to accomplish as humans. The same is true of coding, and it's probably now, 100 years after the creation of writing, to focus less on writing (The Great Books), and more on this new invention: computers (The Great Linuxes). A decent understanding of economics would presage that coding is as essential of skill as writing, and if you want to be a participant in the future economy, no matter who you are, you need to learn how to program. Sure, this sucks, because work sucks, but if you're scared of work you might as well just quit everything and live off welfare for the rest of your life; call it a day. But trust me, if you're thrilled by what The Great Books offers to you as a humanist, you'll be just as thrilled by what programming has to offer you as a humanist. This information is only like 70 years old, so not a lot of people know about it, but trust me that it is true. You won't be disappointed to put down the liberal arts books (some) and pick up a coding book from your public library.

READ READ READ. Liberal arts degrees are my research topic and the aforementioned paragraphs are my conclusions after 12 years of research, plus personal experience. Don't be a solitary artist looking for fame and wealth, but instead join a team of programmers developing a website or app that will improve the whole world. Liberal arts majors love to say science is colonial and harmful to society and nature. Don't believe it. Marry sciences with the liberal arts (that's what the Enlightenment after all, and it hasn't failed us yet). Study the Enlightenment and Enlightenment thinkers since and use it as a guide as a person living in modernity. The rabbit hole of paranoia and curmudgeonly outlook by liberal arts professors might get them a job in academia or maybe even a TED talk or two, but it is machiavellian and won't get them talked about and read in 500 years.

Liberal arts degrees, with their $60,000-$240,000 pricetags, are a shiny product designed and marketed to appeal to vulnerable nerds who like to read. Don't fall for the advertising, and truly research it's utility. That's what I did, and I successfully avoided grad school ($100,000 saved) and my life has never been better without that debt. I still got burned on getting an undergraduate degree, but that was my mistake getting talked into going to a college that didn't have a computer science department (they're so progressive, right? lmao). Is a liberal arts degree worth 80 times the cost of studying at Treehouse for four years, or 40 times the cost of a University of the People CS degree? Or 300 times the cost of riding your bike to the public library for four years? Probably not. This is where true humanism lies, in the scientific method and not mysticism and supernatural explanations. The economics of a liberal arts degree is just a disaster, and I join the rank of people recuperating from all those sleek admission department guidebooks and fat course catalogs that made me sign up in a liberal arts department instead of a STEM department. I thought this essay would help someone else who is gullible like I was, a humanist walking headfirst into a pit of antihumanism disguised as the "humanities". I would only pursue a liberal arts degree if you landed a full ride scholarship, and even then don't expect a job at the end of your four years. Dream bigger than a future as a barista. Learn to program and propel yourself past limitations imposed by compounding debt while you're young. Take what would be $60,000 of stuent loan debt at age 22 and instead put that in your maxed-out 401k in your job as a programmer and invest in the S&P500 index fund: You'll find yourself a millionaire at retirement with just the equivalent of college tuition, not including anything more that you put in. That's the true cost of a liberal arts degree. Adjust to reality and teach yourself to program online.

Praeger U is trash and propaganda and I wouldn't wish anyone to experience even two of their videos, but this one from JBP is spot on. (Don't @ me, I'm a JBP fan; sorry if we can't be friends anymore because of that...):
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/LquIQisaZFU" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/8gBVrJXnqU0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>