---
date: "2019-06-02"
title: "An Update On My Schizophrenia Medicine Being Denied By My Insurance"
ghissue: 81
---

I wrote a few posts ago about how I was just encountering news that my new employer's insurance (to which I pay the most expensive health care plan, roughly $200 a month), denied my doctor's prescription for invega sustenna to be covered. I was nervous at the time that I would be put on second-generation schizphrenia medicine like risperdal, which the insurance company requires as part of their mandate that schizophrenia patients start with more affordable medicine than the newest generation of drugs, in hope that a medicine is found that doesn't require great expense. This kind of reminds me of graduate school, in that as soon as you think you are accepted into a college to study for the tenure of your academic career, you're faced after just four short years of another required application to continue your studies, at which point the decision to continue study isn't in your hands but is in the hands of some people with truly inflated egos and axes to grind politically, emotionally, and socially. It's basically a way to say, "No responsibility here" to anything that a person suffers from, even though there basic job is, in the university's case, to ensure a lifelong education, and in the insurance company's case, to cover necessary medicine. How you can override the doctor's request for medicine and say that they know better about what is required or not is the apogee of hubris.

But the "good" news is that I'm not going to have to drop down the risperdal or equivalent second generation drug, which has many more side effects like permanent tardives dyskinesia (invega sustenna's only side effect to me is massive weight gain, which I moderate somewhat successfully by running a ton and eating WFPB). My mother told me that when I started my previous job, she actually spent a lot of time talking with the staff at the clinic to tell them that it was essential the insurance company covered my medicine, even though they too had the "Step Therapy" requirement. Fortunately working at a private university, I had good insurance and I was approved for the medicine, probably with some resistance. The truth is, the medicine is expensive, and I'm embarassed I'm causing an accumulation of higher premium on my colleagues. But I am sick and require medicine. The only medicine that has worked so far is this particular type of injection. Otherwise I sit in bed all day and trip out with psychosis. It's a question of whether I can work or not, or study in school, or take care of myself. I wish I wasn't in this bind of requiring expensive medicine (medicine I could never personally afford). But otherwise it's extremely detrimental psychosis, zero friends, zero ability to function, and no job. So in some sense, my entire attempt to turn my life into something prosperous and financially independent while I'm still "young" requires expensive medicine. The guilt of this is immense, because someone somewhere is paying for this medicine, and I often feel shitty and useless and not in charge but dependent on charity. Not that that's bad, but a life goal is obvious sustainability and finding a way to have to rely on charity as little as possible in order to permit them to focus their effort on someone else in need. I can only do this with my medicine, I empirically know.

I was denied Patient Assistance due to earning too much income. This presents the awkward Catch-22 where my medicine, which allows me to work, isn't covered while working, but upon quitting would actually be covered. Ugh, talk about reality stepping in when you're excited about getting a new job and moving up in your career. BAM! No work for you because you have a genetic disease that requires modern medicine.

I also recently read that my particular medicine was approved for a FDA-approved recommendation that it be allowed to be advertised as reducing time in prison by schizophrenics. The unfortunate result of this decision is that the patent for the medicine was extended, so that there won't be a generic for many more years. So again, I'm stuck for another decade relying on expensive medicine paid for by others. I felt really shitty when I read that, since there was some news that a pharmaceutical company had started develop a generic for invega sustenna (but had been sued by Jansson to stop because their patents were still active). I think the patents were due to expire soon, but not now.

The plan right now by my non-profit health care provider is to rely on samples to fulfill my needs, which I believe they acquire through the pharmaceutical company. I'm not sure how that works, it could be through another nonprofit or charity or something, but I'm left with the guilt that my non-profit will be left with the cost. It's truly crappy, and recently my psychiatrist and me were discussing the possibility of moving to the once-every-three-month invega trinza injection, which would save me taking time off work to get the injection every four weeks. While it's only an hour, it could be a nice benefit to using new medicine. I imagine this is off the tables now, so I will be relying on monthly injections. I also feel bad because my nonprofit health care provider in Topeka deserves to get paid by the insurance company, and now they'll be spending money on me instead of receiving money.

I'm also sort of angered now to consider stopping paying for the most expensive insurance plan and getting the high-deductable HSA plan. Why pay for the most expensive plan when they aren't providing for my only medical need? This way I can start investing in a HSA too. But I'm nervous to rely on a high-deductable when I'm patently sick and rely on monthly mental health care. I'll think about this more, unfortunately my open enrollment was just last month so I'm stuck with paying high premiums for the oncoming year.

I think it's disappointing that insurance companies view mental health as something that can still be treated by second generation schizphrenia drugs. It's a sad state that the only medicine the insurance company will willingly comply with are treatments developed in the sixties. It's certainly retro and I'm stuck with the risk of having to quit my job now because my medicine that works flawlessly (and is a 99% cure) is too expensive. Talk about feeling dehumanized and valueless.

Fortunately my mom and my mental health care nonprofit have my back. I'm truly grateful for the work they do, and hope someday to repay them for giving me a career and a cure. Though I'm sad I was sick and unemployed for six years after college, six years is chump change in the grand scheme of a 90 year life. I basically am assured that I will have a cure for my schizophrenia for the rest of my life, either while employed through samples if insurance is denied, or through patient assistant plans if unemployed or retired. Eventually the medicine will be genericized too, at which point it will not be a struggle to get it covered by insurance. I feel very fortunate that my disease has been cured, and I'm certainly not going to squander it by not working and try to live a life geared towards philanthropy in my community when I die.

There is a [NAMI post](https://www.nami.org/Find-Support/Living-with-a-Mental-Health-Condition/Understanding-Health-Insurance/What-to-Do-If-You-re-Denied-Care-By-Your-Insurance) about what to do if your insurance is denied. We'll see if I can do anything, though I doubt it.

Just thought I'd write a post about it due to a somewhat personal goal of being open and talking about having a mental illness as a computer scientist to reduce the crushing stigma, and a blog is a good format for that. It's obviously not all roses and kittens having a genetic disease, and perhaps talking about my life will allow others to understand the difficulties encountered by people with a mental illness. We're not all violent mass murderers, homeless vagrants, or people who would only benefit society is they were just gotten rid of. Fortunately we can be cured by modern medicine, the only problem is it is unfairly expensive. But as someone that pays state and federal taxes on my income, I feel like the government should firmly encourage insurance companies pay for my necessary medicine in order to keep generating those taxes for them. In fact, I don't rely on medicaid or anything like that so I'm preserving their funds. Unfortunately we're pretty easy to walk on. So I am going to be free about my diagnosis, since the past ten years of hiding my mental illness from friends and family has been devastatingly lonely, isolating, and obfuscatory. Obviously the social cost could potentially be unemployment, but people need to learn that modern medicine basically cures schizophrenia, it's just impossibly expensive to allow for all schizophrenics in America, for example, to be put on it. Welp, guess my healthcare nonprofit and I will just have to lifehack my medical coverage and put up the best fight we can!