---
date: "2019-01-05"
title: "Bootstrap Your Computer Science Career"
ghissue: 16
---

Here's a way to start a career as a developer for minimal investment -- only the cost of a Raspberry Pi and broadband.

Start off by reading books from your public library's computer programming stacks. Start off with a programming language like Java or C++, which your library is likely to cover. If your library has newer programming books, perhaps you can find one on Node or modern JavaScript. Start off with your local public library. Reading through a thick programming book designed to take you from the basics to some fairly advanced topics will teach you how to read computer science textbooks by following along by typing the code at home or at the library. By reading a big book on Java or C++, or newer languages if your public library is well funded, can introduce you to computer programming much more thoroughly than video tutorials can. You should spend as much of your time as you can in the programming stacks at your public library. This should be the source of your programming lessons for as long as you feasibly can draw value out of it. This is free, and computer programming books aren't cheap, so those books are a good resource. This will make you comfortable enough in programming in a single language or two so that you can begin broadening your languages as well as studying more advanced topics.

If your public library is well stocked, I could easily see spending a year just reading through their programming stack. Public Libraries unfortunately don't carry computer science books, I've found, so don't expect to study computer science topics at the public library. But for now, you should feel comfortable programming simple apps and enjoy reading through thick programming language books.

After spending as much time as feasibly possible in your public library programming stacks, you should begin to explore your public library's video tutorial services for more advanced computer programming topics. My public library, for example, subscribes to Treehouse and Lynda. These services cover many issues related to computer science and programming, and are a very good resource for learning new frameworks and languages. Treehouse is basically a computer science college degree for free, and Lynda has helped me on the path to mastering frameworks. Video tutorials require a computer with dual monitors, so if you don't have a second monitor you might want to invest in a cheap or used ipad to watch the programming tutorials on. Obviously buy a stand for it too. Using your public library's video tutorial resources will let you explore advanced programming topics while still being completely free. Video tutorials aren't great for learning how to program (although you are free to try to do so if you find it works), but once you learn the basics of programming, then you can quickly build your library of languages in which you are comfortable programming. Lynda has a very large database of lessons, and you could spend many years studying there. Treehouse is basically four years worth of programming lessons. The limit to your knowledge is only restricted by the amount of time you put into these resources. We live in an amazing age where video tutorials equivalent to thousands of textbooks are affordable enough for public libraries to subscribe to on behalf of their patrons. See what your public library offers, and hopefully they subscribe (or will subscribe upon some prodding) to Lynda or Treehouse.

After you expend every resource your public library offers, it's time to start studying computer science specifically. You can use the [curriculum](/curriculum) compiled here as a guideline for your study of computer science. You can obviously skip the beginning programming lessons on the curriculum, and instead start with the computer science topics. Here you'll be able to study OER for free, or else reverse engineer syllabi from colleges and universities and read their assigned textbooks for free using Library Genesis. You aren't necessarily focusing on programming, though if you find OpenCourseWare that provides problem sets for homework that use programming. You're trying to learn enough about computer science that you can be literate regarding programming topics when you get your first job as a programmer. This doesn't require a master's, but it does require that you put aside the programming videos for a while and study the academic stuff for a year or two. It's not like this should be a burden - computer science topics are fun and exciting to study. But you're not going to learn those topics from your public library's resources. Instead you will have to rely on OER, Library Genesis, MOOCs, and OpenCourseWare. Again, you can download the syllabi from the first couple years of student classes at a good university and reverse engineer the reading list and problem sets. Rely on OpenCourseWare (we link to many online databases of online OCW classes and YouTube playlists in the [About](/about) section) to get you through this phase. You will be flying solo in preparation for your first programming job. If you aren't familiar with OpenCourseWare, now is the time to delve into the resources provided by universities for your own personal studies. They are extremely helpful.

Now you're about three years into your intensive exploration of programming. Now you'll want to subscribe to PluralSight for a year to round out the frameworks and topics you know. PluralSight is $200 a year. You can study non-programming topics like how to build a career, find a first job, develop a good resume (I suggest making a github pages website for a resume), and have a successful technology career. You should study these along with learning frameworks relevant to the career you want to start. Studying PluralSight topics intensively for a year will help you prepare for a first career. You'll develop your resume by researching advanced topics related to programming, and you'll be able to do things like start making demo programs or websites. PluralSight is a very good resource for only $200 a year. Continue studying computer science topics using your previous means and finishing up the loose ends of yours studies in order to obtain your first job.

In your first job, now that you've been studying computer science for four years, make sure that you get tuition reimbursement as a benefit. You can try and negotiate this if it doesn't, but your job should give you reimbursement especially since you skipped college and need to finish that task up. Don't pay for university credits yourself, that's a huge waste of money and unneeded given all the free and cheap resources available on the internet. But since you are self-taught, you're definitely going to want your employer to pay for your college side-study. The benefit will be a small amount (in my case, it is $3000 a year) or else a percentage of the tuition fee. You are going to be studying computer science at the most affordable online universities (University of the People and Georgia Tech OMSCS), so it'll be as affordable as possible. When you are working in your first job, you are going to want to enroll in University of the People. For the next four years you'll be taking online classes towards a programming degree. Even though you may consider yourself a good enough programmer that you don't want to take beginning programming classes, it'll actually be useful to get accreditation because you're going to want to eventually get a master's degree using your tuition reimbursement, so you need to finish up a bachelor's degree. University of the People will be a breeze because you already know how to program. University of People costs $1000 a year, so your tuition reimbursement should definitely cover it or else the percentage cost passed to you will be small. There's no need to pay for university out of your own pocket, now that there are cheap online CS educations like UoPeople and GT OMSCS. These could be good options for getting your first job if you work part time to pay their tuition price, but it is also nice to be able to pay for these for free through tuition reimbursement. 

While working your first computer science job, you will want to continue to use PluralSight and other online resources to keep abreast of the topics and frameworks related to your job. Perhaps your employer will pay for your PluralSight as an education cost for you (mine does). You'll be working on your UoPeople degree and Georgia Tech OMSCS degree for a number of years while you work. It'll keep you extremely occupied and busy, but the reward for having a master's degree in computer science will be worth it in terms of salary potential. Live as frugally as possible and save 50-80% of your pay by maxing out your 401k and IRA, and putting the rest in a post-tax investment account at Vanguard. Choose total stock market index funds (VTSAX), or else [make the equivalent in large-, mid-, and small-cap index funds](https://jlcollinsnh.com/2013/05/02/stocks-part-xvii-what-if-you-cant-buy-vtsax-or-even-vanguard/) (81% large, 6% mid, 13% small), or just invest in your fund's S&P 500 index fund if that's the only index fund offered. Remember: only invest in index funds, never active mutual funds. Index funds have an expense ratio of 0.04-0.3, depending on your plan. Take advantage of tax-deferred accounts like your 401K and IRA while you're young by maxing them out each year. Doing that for a decade in your twenties will provide you a huge amount of money to retire on at age 60. Any money saved after maxing out your pre-tax accounts can go into a post-tax account at Vanguard, [which will begin accumulating value in order to fund an early retirement](http://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2018/11/29/how-to-retire-forever-on-a-fixed-chunk-of-money/) by providing returns which you can live off of before you turn 60 and finally have access to your 401k and IRA.

Because you have a first programming job without any college debt, you will be able to pump more money into savings that would otherwise go to paying off your college loans, so you'll have nearly four decades for your savings to compound until the age you retire. If you keep your savings rate high and your expenses low while earning a programmer's salary, [you could even retire decades earlier than usual](https://networthify.com/calculator/earlyretirement). The early years of your career are very important for retirement, because the money you save then will have much more time to compound than if you start working towards financial independence later in life. Don't squander your success as a programmer by not living frugally. Remember, that's the whole reason you are self-taught instead of university educated, so that you can accomplish financial independence and live without any debt. For tips on living frugally, you can always read [Mr. Money Mustache](https://www.mrmoneymustache.com) or most financial independence blogs and books.

Many jobs of the future will be programming jobs. By studying computer science now, whether you are young or old, you can find a job at or near your home town which will provide for you a comfortable life. Early retirement could be a goal, but frugality combined with cheap education provided by internet resources will allow you to flourish as a programmer so that thanks to your lifestyle choices you will obtain financial independence quick. Once you're financially independent, you can start exploring programming through a lens that you, not your employer, define, and use computer science towards goals that are yours alone. Programming is a powerful asset to have, and as a computer scientist you will be more likely to pursue your interests and ideas if you are financially independent. Using the resources outline in this post, coupled with this website and others like it that compile affordable online computer science education, you can get your first job programming with an investment of only hundreds of dollars instead of the tens of thousands of dollars that universities cost. By saving while young, earning compound gains in your early years, as opposed to paying compound interest in student loans, you can find the happy life that comes from refusing to go into debt (even for education). 

I'm not saying it will be all roses and sparkles. Being self-taught through your public library can be extremely grueling and demanding. You'll face distrust and even resentment. You're willingly removing yourself from the dog eat dog world of private universities and academia. You're placing your bets on the internet instead of academia as being the modern solution to computer scientist training, and if you're not familiar with the suite of apps and services out there you might not be willing to believe self-education is possible. That's why I created this website, to promote OER-literacy so programmers know what resources are at their disposal in their quest to become the world's greatest computer scientists. I fully believe that a public library will, in the future, be the place where you earn your bachelor's degree. In the moment, the services offered by a public library, if you're lucky in your hometown, are already sufficient for self-training in computer science. With public libraries offering Treehouse and Lynda, there are great and free resources for anyone with an internet connection that can provide a serious boost to someone's study of programming. Couple in OpenCourseWare, OER, Library Genesis, and a cheap PluralSight account, and you're set for years of study that can get you a first job. Utilize your job's tuition reimbursement and UoPeople and GT OMSCS and you'll find yourself in your thirties with a master's degree in computer science that cost you nothing at all. By matching your drive to work as hard as possible with a drive to invest in index funds as much as possible, you could set yourself up for FIRE'ing. I'm not saying your career as a computer scientist has to be short, but it's a nicer problem to have than to not have, right?
