---
date: "2018-08-22"
title: "Competing Models of Education: The University versus the Public Library"
---


There are two competing models of what higher education should look like: the university model and the public library model. The opening salvo of the war between the two institutions could perhaps be seen as the widespread popularity of the 1997 film "Good Will Hunting" and it's infamous bar scene ([https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=azM6xSTT2I0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=azM6xSTT2I0)). A $150,000 Harvard education versus a $1.50 public library education doesn't just explain itself in its relation to access to books: it is a competition of ideologies. Even modern digital video tutorials on computer science can be accessed for free through your public library's Treehouse or Lynda subscriptions. When supplemented with the free computers available at the public library as well as their collection of programming books in the stack, everything that is required to become a computer scientist is available for free through your public library. Why spend $4000 on a University of the People education when you could get the equivalent for $4 in late charges at your public library?

The success of the public library model is built into the system itself: Whereas to make itself more affordable to compete with free online learning, colleges are going to have to start using OER as course textbooks. But OER don't require being "subscribed" to your local college to access them. ANYONE on the internet can access free OER. OER is basically the public library model applied to ebooks - the OER book is permanently in a public library and never as a result of paying tuition fees to a college. Why spend $4000 on a University of the People degree that uses OER when you can just look at their syllabus and read the OER required, for free, on the internet? That's the magic of the copyleft license -- all derivative works are required to be free and copyleft licensed too. That way no one can monetize the public library model. OER is the result of the author permanently dedicating their work into a global public library. Because there is no global electronic public library, OER is the license that ensures for its equivalence. Dedicating a work to an OER license places that book in a free, global, electronic public library for the rest of eternity. OER operates on the public library model, not the college model. To quote Matt Damon, why pay $150 for a textbook when you could have read the equivalent for $0 on your OER public library laptop?

UoPeople is proof that the public library model is the future of education in the twenty-first century. In fact, University of the People has built into the ability to incorporate the public library model. Just like Treehouse has a $300-a-year subscription but is available for free to patrons if your public library pays for its service, UoPeople could easily exchange free student enrollment for library patrons if the library pays for its service fee. Though perhaps this won't happen with UoPeople, it is inevitable this will happen with a similar social justice university program and that within a decade you will be able to get an online degree for free through your public library. In that very true sense, the public library model wins. Free college education will not take place in community colleges or public universities. The very nature of those programs is the subscription model where students pay a subscription fee to participate and study. The public library model where the public library pays for the student's subscription fee is the future of free college education. Even though this will happen in the future, there is a benefit in that you don't have to wait for the future to reap the benefits of the success of the public library model. You can go down to your public library right now and learn to program for free. You might not get a degree -- yet -- but you'll still know how to program when it's time to find employment. You won't be serving fries, you'll be a professional computer scientist that gets tuition reimbursement through her job so that you can get a degree for free while working. With the public library model, there is a lifetime of free computer science education as opposed to four years of astronomic, soul-crushing debt. Being frugal and financially independent is a result of a personal pact to never taking on debt in any form and never spend money that you don't have. And avoiding debt by using public library resources is the easiest way to preserve financial independence. To participate in the college model instead of the public library model is to invite disaster upon your house just like using credit cards. Because the credit card industry makes money when you can't control your impulses and put things on credit. And the university industry makes money when you can't control your impulses and put subscription fees to educational lectures on credit.

Do you still buy music CDs? No? Why not? Because Spotify is $10 a month. Should you still buy university lectures? No! Why not? Because educational lectures are available for free on your public library's electronic subscription to Lynda and Treehouse or in their book stacks. Are CDs any cheaper now that Spotify has been invented? No, they are still $10-15 on Amazon. And the case is the same for university lectures. They are no cheaper even though YouTube has been invented. Heck, vinyl records still sell for $20-30. Just because they are still selling CDs and Vinyl records in the store doesn't mean they are still the best option for listening. They are there because the infrastructure is still in place for their creation. The printing presses didn't shut down completely. Just like the university lecture halls haven't been foreclosed upon. There are still people buying these old technologies. And that's fine. It makes no difference to me if you prefer vinyl, I use to in my younger days. But to suggest that purchasing vinyl is mandatory for all music listeners and no other formats should be used is silly, and that's basically what universities are attempting to pull with the success of the public library model. Sorry, I am going to listen to Apple Music for $10/month and have access to every song ever written. And sorry, I am never going to take on debt to listen to an educational lecture when they are available for free as OpenCourseWare on YouTube or as a unit on Treehouse or Lynda. Although there is no doubt that vinyl is a lot cooler than mp3, if I were to pursue building a music library in vinyl or CD that is equivalent to my collection on Apple Music, I would go broke. And my pursuit of education also has to be frugal and make some sacrifices. Though university is cool as hell, it like vinyl has to be moved on from and appreciated as a really cool era in history that forever changed the world. But it cannot be seen as a sustainable future given all that I am up against in the world. I demand streaming in compressed format, so that I can conserve my networking costs while at the same time having the ability to consume the lecture anywhere I am at the moment, not just from a preordained lecture hall. I don't need a subscription for $1000 a month when my public library subscription is $0 a month. I'd simply rather not labor to pay that subscription fee when I can be frugal. Just like I don't buy goods on credit, I don't buy books and lectures on credit. Just like the mp3 was invented to move on from CDs, the public library now subscribes to college-equivalent computer science lectures as a way to move on from university. There are benefits and costs. But ultimately I appreciate listening to any song ever written on Apple Music for $10 a month. It's just a really good service. And the public library model is a really good service in that sense. It will take you to your life goals in a much more frugal way than spending on credit ever will. Being financially independent means having the self control to only use a debit card and never use a credit card.

The public library model is the forbearer of open source programming. Just like linux was committed to the GPL license, so too books are committed at your local library to be freely available to any patron for as long as the book is on the shelf. The public library never charges a subscription fee, unlike the university model, so there is a low barrier of entry to everyone in the community. There are no age restrictions on the public library model, so you can become a programmer at any age as opposed to just 18-22. The university model is flawed because it relies on credit -- in fact, it makes money off the student buying its product on credit -- so there will always be incentive to hurt you as much as possible. The university model has passwords on its wifi, as opposed to the public library open access hotspots. The university model charges subscription fees to its electronic resources, as opposed to the free electronic resources with the public library model. The public library model hurts very few people with debt -- maybe $1.50 in late charges -- while the university model has no qualms about saddling a patron with $150,000 debt at the drop of a hat. If you are committed to frugality, there is more return on investment with going with the open source public library model instead of the university model. Frugality makes some sacrifices, sure, no one's denying that. But living your life with the principle of never purchasing something on credit can leave you stress free and prosperous.

I would not bet my money on the successful re-adaptation of the university model. Exclusivity is built into its very foundation as a model of education. It cannot exist without high subscription fees. If you truly think it can, then you are welcome to place your money where your allegiance lies. But if you examine the university model in comparison to the public library model, you will see that the open source inheritance is where it is going to succeed for the sake of its patrons. OER is just a hint of the prosperity that results from the sweet combination of electronic resources with built-in zero cost. Open source is possible because of the internet, and free university education is possible because of public libraries. Just the simple existence of interlibrary loans should give you serious pause about the ability of a library to replace a university lecture. Why pay $150 for a textbook when you can get it free through interlibrary loans? Why pay UoPeople $4000 to read OER when you can read OER for free? The university model sinks into the past while the public library model flies into the future. Don't find yourself living with the repercussions of betting on the wrong model. The results could be tragic and costly. Get your public library on board with Treehouse and Lynda as a way to augment their computer science stacks and you will find yourself with multiple lifetimes of programming tutorials. The lessons available with just those two subscriptions are enough to provide years of training and self-education. I've been using Treehouse for four years through my public library and I'm only halfway through the curriculum. Lynda supplements this nicely by having a ton more of programming lessons. This doesn't even take into consideration the massive amounts of free CS OER available, as documented by this website's curriculum. I have more to study than I could ever hope to accomplish, and the many lifetimes of work is completely free. I would have to be ridiculously careless to ever enroll in a master's or PhD program for tuition. Why take off time from work to earn a certificate that I don't even need? It won't ensure any more success for as much as it would cost. People always say spend money on education but they don't have the education about education to know how easy it is to find meaningful but frugal OER on computer science. All this is possible through open source licensing and the internet. For sure I'm on board. I'm paying $45 a month in my high speed cable bill for it. Why waste it? I have a public library card. Why waste it?
