---
date: "2018-09-06"
title: "Computers are Colleges"
---

Have you heard of my school? I go to Apple MacBook Pro (15-inch, Mid 2012) University. Perhaps you've heard the school of my associate degree, Raspberry Pi Community College? It cost $50. The fact is, in modern times you could write down the model of your computer as your schooling on your resume. Computers are colleges. The things you can learn at university you can learn on your computer for free. There is nothing that prevents you from taking on an university course load using open educational resources that only require a Raspberry Pi and internet. A lot of people wonder what the point of the internet is? I would say the point of the internet (and the entire infrastructure surrounding computers we've built as a civilization) is to deliver college for free. There was a product -- college -- and a demand: cheaper college. The solution was to invent the internet. Going to college in the day and age of high speed internet is a lot like buying an antique model of car. The prestige is in driving around in an antique vehicle. Perhaps you get to participate in a car parade or car show with your old make of car that's still in pristine condition. But antique cars aren't anything but a hobby. They aren't convenient (in fact you'll pay exponentially greater expenses to maintain and repair it compared to a modern car) and the price you pay for the luxury of joining the small clique of antique car owners is paid for in your wallet. You can't take antique cars on a cross-country trip. Their functionality is limited in modern society with modern needs. A college degree is like an antique car because you get a special license, but ultimately the struggle you're signing your life away for is to fight against devaluation as much as possible by pumping costly renovations into it like continuously putting new paint jobs onto it and buying new parts. College, in the day of the internet, is a forty-year old car: nostalgically impressive if you're rich enough to maintain it, but ultimately an expensive hobby when evaluated as a modern utility. Buy a modern (electric) car: open educational resources. The conversion of internal combustion engines to electric cars is very similar to the transition from expensive colleges to free and affordable online post-secondary education.  If you have an interest in antique cars and have the money, then go for it. No one can deny your hobby. But if you are looking for a modern mode of transportation, then buying a cheap electric car is a much better investment. Same with self-study using open education, instead of risking student debt crisis.

If you come to see computers as a university education in a 24 square inch box, then you'll come to appreciate the view I have that university has been surpassed by online learning. I just don't believe that it is cheaper, I actually believe it is superior. That'll be a hard sell for most people, to believe that you can get a better online education than you can get from a brick and mortar university. But just look at the fact that in a few years every book ever written will be available for $15/month a la Spotify. The entire advantage that university has, with their academic library and syllabi of required reading, can be accomplished by anyone for $180 a year. The public library has interlibrary loans which allows you access to nearly any textbook ever written concerning computer science. This stuff gets learning done for free. There is zero cost associated with reading (electronic) books nowadays or interlibrary loans. If you are paying for books, stop! There is a more frugal way. At the point in which a university library is no longer an asset because every book available in its computer science stacks is available for free online, there isn't much of a reason to pay tuition for access to it. It sort of becomes redundant. In fact, paper books are even more of an annoyance that digital books, because paper books are heavy and burdensome while your ipad is one pound total for tens of thousands of pdfs and epubs. Everything materially advantageous about a university is being replicated inside of a computer. Everything that makes learning successful at a university is being ported over to computers. That's why I believe computers are colleges, and in the future it will make sense to say you studied at your public library on your laptop instead of putting down a university for your degree.

I think there need to be room for people who live in poverty to make hybrid resumes where their education is a bit community/public colleges, part public library, and part open education. The notion that you have to have a traditional degree is going to lose favor when people succeed at programming through their online educations. Most adults simply don't know about open source software, and they don't know that there are open source textbooks. People don't know that you can earn a b.s. in CS for $4k through UoPeople, or a master's in CS for $7k through Georgia Tech OMSCS. A lot of people think that if they don't get a traditional degree they will miss out on life. But life isn't a diploma. Life is being frugal when you are impoverished and not going into debt by paying for things you can't afford through credit. Life is relying on social services when you are in need, and not thinking that you're too important to turn down charity like UoPeople or MOOCs/OpenCourseWare/OpenEd because you deserve regional accreditation. It's not glamorous to admit that you can't afford college. In fact, it's downright angering. Other kids go to school without a sweat. Why can't you go to school? But you can go to school. It's called an internet-connected Raspberry Pi. You can learn to program for $50 and the cost of internet. I made this website so you can see that you can read great computer science textbooks for free. The reading list doesn't even include books or CS programming tutorials through sites like Lynda found at your local public library. Your college is your computer. Everything you need to learn to become a computer scientist can be learned through your computer. People who manufacture computers and websites and networks have built for you a modern college. Just because it doesn't cost tens of thousands of dollars, or participate in an antiquated accreditation system, doesn't mean that it isn't a worthy academic institution. Your Raspberry Pi is a library, a classroom, a study hall, a conference room, a professor's office, a lecture hall, and a local hangout. I know it's not as glamorous as the life depicted of students in movies and books, but the inarguable fact is that it is free. Perhaps this appeals to your sense of frugality, or perhaps it appeals to the facts of your economic circumstances. But if you see your Raspberry Pi as a university, you will be able to appreciate all that it offers if you work and study hard through it. A lot of people act like they're hopeless when it comes to college, and that they're forced to attend college even though they can't afford it and they act angered that college isn't cheaper. But holy hell, haven't any of these people heard of Open Educational Resources? College is cheaper, it's practically free through your computer. I think it's very unfortunate that people are stuck with non-forgivable debt because of college, and it's a lot like gambling, but I hate the approach that says Americans are hopeless. If people study how to study online, they'll learn that there is ample OER for all levels of undergraduate study. Books can be acquired through interlibrary loans. The idea that we're all hopeless to exorbitant tuition prices acts as if computers were never invented. Those people want to act like bricks and mortar colleges are the future, when in fact they won't be much of a player in future life. The educated youth in the future will acquire their knowledge through open educational resources, and studying online for free instead of going to colleges they can't afford will be extremely sensible given how extensive OER will be in a decade's time. When the Spotify for books is invented (and licensing hammered out), there will be a significant interest in online learning versus traditional colleges.

I know technophilia is inexcusable, but the jobs of the future will be delegated out to programmers and computer scientists quite a lot. At least they have a central role. Most physical phenomenon in the world will be taken into the digital realm, where programmers become the engineers of the future. The public library contains all the resources you need to learn to program, and the Raspberry Pi allows you to build a satellite public library in your room for $50 and the cost of internet. The days of paying for college, living in a different city, and buying expensive textbooks is over. Thank god. I was able to become a programmer for $8000 thanks to resources available at my public library and public university. I have since discovered that because of OER I could practically learn what I studied for next to nothing. Fortunately it was only $8k, so I don't have significant buyer's remorse. But I will promote the free education available through open ed because I believe that it is the future, and I like to be an early adopter of futuristic technology (especially when it's free). I have made this website to compile the work of many computer scientists who have created free curriculum and compendium of OpenCourseWare so that you can get a high quality education for free. Don't ever feel embarrassed that you study online. The social stigma of online learning is fierce, but the people who make fun of you will be seen as fools in the future. When people ask where you went to college and you reply that you went to Raspberry Pi Community College for $50, there should be no stigma. Nothing is wrong with being impoverished. Being an impoverished computer scientist isn't reason for ostracism, though with the culture of programming people fear that it will be. Many in Hollywood want to depict computer science as a non-stop party of luxury, but that's not the reality that I've found. I found people accepting of my lack of a CS degree. My sister always points barbs at me and says that computer scientists are privileged, but being a working class scientist is much more possible than it ever was because of OER. If you need inspiration, just take a look at the list of OER CS books at [EBookFoundation](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books/blob/master/free-programming-books.md). All those books are free because the author wanted working class kids to be able to read their books and learn computer science through them. Computer Scientists invented open source licensing so that books could be published for free through the internet and still protect the rights of authors. Authors aren't benefitting from open sourcing their books, they're doing it because they know that impoverished students can't afford textbooks. Just take a look at the long list of OER on that page, and take comfort that computer scientists around the world care about working class computer scientists. Open source software allows for you to become a scientist for as close to free as possible. Scientists benefit when there are more scientists in the world. It's not a zero-sum game. Open source was invented so that your computer could become a college for you. Open source was invented so you could become a scientist even if you are impoverished. Scientists want you to become a scientist. That's why they release their books in open source format. If you don't believe me, just take a look at the number of [free science books](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-science-books/blob/master/free-science-books.md) compared to the list of [free computer science books](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books/blob/master/free-programming-books.md). All those books were released on the explicit mission that they get in the hands of impoverished people. That's the whole reason OER exists. You should be proud you are a computer scientist and part of the open source CS community. This is a community I've been a member of since I taught myself Red Hat in ninth grade, and it's never let me down (and my worst moments were when I turned my back to them and played with proprietary software). You should be proud to be a student at the Raspberry Pi Community College, which costs $50 total. The instructors and staff really care about you.

