---
date: "2019-05-29"
title: "You Don't Need to Spend a Cent to Learn Computer Science"
ghissue: 77
---

There is a pretty simple fact in computer science education that most people, especially those in educational technology, try to smother out: You Don't Need to Spend a Cent to Learn Computer Science. I heard this line on a Mad FIentist podcast, where the guest explained through various financial independence blogs like Mr. Money Mustache (not to mention our [free index funds books repo](https://github.com/HolmSchool/free-index-funds-books)), you could learn the basics of financial independence totally free. And I firmly believe that to be the case for computer science too. There are so many open source educational resources that anyone can learn to program for free.

Let's look at the specifics. If you learn better by reading, there is the [Holm School curriculum](https://holm.school/curriculum) as well as the [EbookFoundation archive](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books/blob/master/free-programming-books.md) of free CS books. [Saylor Academy](https://learn.saylor.org/course/index.php?categoryid=9) creates OER-based CS classes. I recently saw Seattle Public Library has a subscription plan for Safari Books, which is ridiculously cool and I hope is mimicked by public libraries around the world. If your ethics are more vagabondic, you can find any published CS book for free on Library Genesis and use the curriculum laid out on [teachyourselfcs.com](https://www.teachyourselfcs.com), [functionalcs](https://functionalcs.github.io/curriculum/), or on actual CS syllabi from top schools posted online. If you learn best by watching college lectures, there are compendiums of CS OpenCourseWare on github like [Developer-Y's](https://github.com/Developer-Y/cs-video-courses). If you learn best by video, your public library probably has a Lynda subscription, and if you're lucky (or you ask nicely) they might even have a Treehouse subscription plan for you. You can also rely on YouTube tutorials. If you learn well through MOOCs, there's always [edX](https://www.edx.org), [Udacity](https://www.udacity.com) and [Coursera](https://www.coursera.com) plus curriculums like [OSSU](https://github.com/ossu) on github. That's not even including the various freemium tutorial websites which you can pick as choose their free curricula, like [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/computing), [codecademy](https://www.codecademy.com/), [freecodecamp](https://www.freecodecamp.org/), and [Odin Project](https://www.theodinproject.com). Oh my god, and did I mention that you can just walk into your public library and check out hundreds of computer science and programming textbooks for free? If something isn't OER, the topic is probably covered multiple times over at your public library (it might not be the latest book, but when you're just beginning you don't need the most cutting edge topicality and older books suffice for learning the ropes of programming).

These are just a sample of all the resources available to teach yourself CS. There are so many it's almost overwhelming just to think about. And yet, that's almost the final word when it comes to open source education surrounding CS: You don't ever have to pay for it.

In my circumstance, my job requires some more domain-specific education concerning the particular stack I work on, so they willingly pay for my PluralSight account. It's roughly $200 a year for good, advanced tutorials related to C#, .NET Core, and Angular which is what I need. The free sites above were enough to get me knowledgable about the stack so that I could get hired, but at that point a paid intermediary was necessary to get me up to snuff so that I could program in our stack. Even with those particular circumstances, I still just want to emphasize: What is necessary to train me for my advanced full stack development job is just $200 a year. That is chump change. I would pay for that even if it weren't reimbursed. When you add something like PluralSight ($200 a year) on top of that OER Stack listed above, plus maybe something like Library Genesis, you basically cover all your educational bases for $200 a year. There is no need for expensive college classes. There is no need for degrees or certificates. All you need is the effort required to self study advanced topics in programming in your free time, and you're absolutely covered with just $200 a year. Even a $4000 University of the People degree could basically fund TWENTY years of PluralSight. I'd rather have twenty years of PluralSight than a undergraduate CS degree. And that's for the cheapest CS bachelor's degree too. That's just how expensive degrees are, and I really honestly believe in this day and age, when you're able to just list out on your resume the years you've put into the OER websites above and can just list the tracks you've completed as well as the many programming languages you know, that not having a degree is not a barrier to your first programming job. You'll still have to self-educate for 2-4 years to match what your degree-owning competitors know, but when you show your competency as a result of your hard work reading CS OER books and programming open source software, you'll find that you can secure a programming job (especially with the low unemployability statistics as of recent, which is a hiree's market). The benefit is obviously that you won't have any debt, and can put that equivalent into your 401k and IRA's S&P500 or VTSAX index fund, possibly even maxing them out thanks to your advantage.

And just because you don't spend money on a degree doesn't mean you're banished to serfdom for the rest of your life. Most programming jobs carry rich benefits, which means you can get tuition reimbursement so that you can spend zero money on an actual bachelors degree from [UoPeople](https://www.uopeople.edu) as well as a master's degree through GATech [OMSCS](http://www.omscs.gatech.edu/). Since you will have already taught yourself programming, you'll breeze through these courses with hardly any effort and will earn your degrees for free thanks to your job's tuition reimbursement. Here's a good life tip: If your education isn't free, don't pay for it. Never go into debt for education in the day and age of the internet and the high demand for programmers. Most places that will "sell" you a CS education are probably a scam.

So I hope you can take in the programming landscape: ubiquitous free educational resources to launch your career as a programmer. Once you've got your first job, your "degrees" don't matter and it's all a matter of performance and competency. From there you can job hop as you learn how enterprise development happens, at which point you can land a high paying job after just a few years of junior positions and truly start maxing out your 401k and IRA in index funds as well as fuel an after-tax index investing account as detailed in [Tips for Personal Finance](https://holm.school/tips-for-personal-finance/). You're set up for early financial independence if you mix index investing with a high savings rate fueled by practical frugality. Welcome to a stress free life!

I really want to thank all the eggheads behind the modern movement of open education. It is truly humbling to think that authors and writers put their sweat and tears behind an educational curriculum, AND THEN made it free online for anyone to study, just out of their kindness and belief that more programmers and more open source software will improve the world. Fortunately, their prophecy rang true and practically all software in the future will be open source. Open Source is now affecting college curriculum, not only to bring down some of the costs like textbooks, but also as a competitor in the educational marketplace (especially when we've reached the point that OER is catalogued so easily through various github repos that accessing it is painfree and immediate). For those edge cases were a degree might help, the responsible approach is to delay it until your job reimburses it, and ensure that the costs are completely covered by sticking with inexpensive, philanthropic online CS degrees like UoPeople and GATech OMSCS. It's a pretty simple plan, one that I hope to spread until it's common knowledge, because student debt is so damaging at age 22. That is the age you should be working to max out your savings and 401k and IRA, so it can compound for 40 years. Delaying that responsibility due to something as useless as student loans for a degree, if you're a computer scientist, is just wasted opportunity.

People think avoiding college debt through strategies like those listed on this website are "risky" and could possibly lead to a lifetime of suffering. What in the world would cause people to believe that being a self-taught programmer is a risk is just blatant ideological prejudices created by propaganda. To think that a self-taught programmer will be some sort of social cripple that can't ever communicate effectively or experience free thought and critical thinking is just weird as hell and signals some deep brainwashing in America. Considering most of the top tech firms at the moment were founded by college dropouts, I'm a little concerned that 18 year olds are going tens of thousands of dollars into debt just to satisfy their parent's fear that self taught programmers are nincompoops. Unforunately the only social ill I suffer from as a self taught programmer is the hopeless realization I'm going to be a millionaire at retirement because of my 70% savings rate in my early thirties thanks to my comfortable programming jobs. Sure, I don't have a programming degree from a prestigious university, so I might not work in Silicon Valley, but I live in a low cost of living city which just also happens to be my hometown so I'm with friends and family. If financial independence is something you would sacrifice in order to gloss your resume with a prestigious academic degree from a private university, I don't think you've studied financial independence enough.

I didn't need to go to university to learn programming, I was doing just fine reading C++ books from my public library, but going to a few years of my hometown public university did help me focus my studies in a positive way as well as leading to some very useful internships. For $8000 total and two years of hard work, I now am nearly financially independent after just a few years of working as a programmer and having a 50-70% savings rate. Fortunately I now am employed in my hometown, where I want to do most of my philanthropy, so I'm going to hunker down, stay frugal, and work my butt off while I'm young and earning those compounding gains in order to fuel a legacy of philanthropy in my hometown. Even if I'm "stunted" intellectually because I never experienced computer science at Harvard or whatever bullshit hedgefund institution passes for prestigious these days, I'm quite happy with the idea that I'm going to be able to donate millions of dollars to my hometown public library when I die. I don't know if being a self taught programmer means that I have poor social skills thanks to not interacting with a tier1 professor, but I'd like to think my "goals" in life are plenty 'social' and freethinking. It's quite a shame that our society views people without degrees as derelicts and social burdens. All while rich billionaires blow their possible philanthropic goals by donating billions to hedge fund schools like ivy league private universities with tens of billions of dollars in their endowment already instead of hitting their donations where they are much more useful, like community colleges. The money keeps flowing into these private universities, where public opinion keeps growing that private universities are the only goal worth having in life for non-flunkies/junkies. And people trying to mimick the prestige of those privates by going to expensive publics find themselves with tremendous debt too, forbidding their investing at an early age when it matters most. It's a tremendously wasteful system that lets universities thrive at the expense of real and naive students.

Open source is an ironic answer to the dilemma. In the day and age where former bastions of humanism, the university, are now Marxist and anti-Enlightenment shitholes, and former bastions of socialist theoretics, like free and open source software, are now fueling modern free market capitalism, the reversal is notable. This is a day and age of waning ideologies. Marxism and postmodernism is gettings its due thanks to Jordan Peterson and Steven Pinker's efforts, fueled by early pioneers and whistle blowers like Gross and Levitt and Alan Sokal. Smoking is now more unpopular than ever, with a more widespread appreciation of the dangers of drinking biting quickly at its heel. Mental illnesses are being understood more clearly and correctly by the mass population rather than stigmatized out of existence and propriety. Meat eating and the standard American diet is increasingly understood as fueling heart disease and cancer, with many people abstaining due to health concerns rather than ethics as Whole Food Plant-Based diet researchers spread their findings through books and movies. There are many old world ideologies getting flushed down the toilet in this new world fueled by computers and the internet where rules are inverted from tradition and being replaced with the latest findings in science instead. At the helm of this is the possibility to fuel a very rewarding career in programming for free online thanks to computer scientists being at the forefront of open source technology. Given the stakes that are raised by extreme student loans and choosing job-prospect-less majors, it seems appropriate to teach about the ubiquitous free resources available to start a career in CS rather than paying tens of thousands of dollars for a major with no jobs at the end of the four years. Not to mention the fact that most well paying jobs in the future, no matter what field, will require programming skills as a prerequisite. Programming is the modern literacy, a non-negotiable skill that ought to be taught in gradeschool if modern educators truly understood what the future holds. I'm not a huge proponent of screen time for kids, but it's a Pascal's Wager when sacrificing some ideals enables such benefits. I taught myself to program in elementary school, and it opened worlds for me that continuously blow my mind in their reward. I don't think just a few self-motivated students should reap the rewards of modern markets and technology.

Is learning programming easy? No, it's quite hard emotionally and intellectually and requires quite a lot of start up capital to get your feet on the ground. But I think lowering the bars as much as possible is an important goal, and that's why as someone that catalogued art historical educational practices the past half century in my senior thesis now shifts my focus to computer science education as a historical artifact, I'm so thrilled about how the barriers to entry are now historically as low as they could ever be. Are all problems of access empty? NO. But do I think the only solution is to throw potential programmers into the meat grinder of university and let them sort out the problems afterwards of having $50,000 of nonbankruptable debt at the ripe age of 22 is a best practice? Hell no. There has to be an alternative, and that's why I promote unschooling/self-taught/'Holm Schooling' as a valid path to boot up your CS career. Is it easier to get a college degree? Of course it is, I'm not delusional. If you score a scholarship and can go to college to study CS somewhere, ANYWHERE for free, it is foolish not to endeavor on that noble task. I'd hope the goal of this Holm School project is to have more advanced dialogue on the subject than that. Yes, college is potentially awesome, no it is not worth tens of thousands of dollars when you can teach yourself at the public library and online for free. You're going to get your foot in the door of the programming industry if you're willing to do the work. I don't make guarantees, but from personal experience the barrier to entry is quite low even for a self taught programmer. Competency trumps ideology. Most academic CS professors are scrambling tooth over nail right now to tarnish the technology industry as anything but a "meritocracy." Of course so, their professions are threatened by OER. If tech isn't a meritocracy, of course you have to go to college and go in debt to pay indulgences to the church and priests of CS for your original sin of privilege that requires forgiveness by receiving a baptism in the font of academic postmodernism. But don't believe the latest iteration of the counter-Enlightenment, it's the same old same old in new clothing, and trust me that you can avoid debt while still enabling yourself to succeed as much as you could ever dream of succeeding in a programming job being self taught. Is it a panacea? NO jeez. But it's a lot better than some of the alternatives like getting a non-STEM degree for a ton of debt, or even paying for non-STEM classes, which don't exactly have a high success rate as far as my experience goes. The academy is broken. Fortunately it looks like the open source community is picking up the slack and creating their own version of Enlightenment and Democratic education on the internet. And guess what, it's usually free. How nice, how humanistic, how eternally gratifying and pleasantly optimistic. This is the community I want to spend four years in, not the sort of environment detailed in Jonathan Haidt's "The Coddling of the American Mind."

The way I think of it, you can pursue a [$5200 F-You Degree](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree) if you are truly concerned about the necessity of a college degree in the modern jobscape and want to hedge your risk by pursuing something that's self taught but at least results in a piece of paper. That's fine with me, in fact I recommend what I did and just go to your local public university and take as many CS classes (only) as possible. That way, you're set up for life in some sense. There's the irony of then qualifying for jobs with tuition reimbursement when there are no classes or degrees to further pursue, but perhaps you just want a job worse than living non-ironically. I truly believe in the individual to make choices for themselves, and that I'm not here to preach or bellow about the One True Path for Success, and I look forward to being proven wrong many times in the future. Sometimes taking on debt seems justified. I wish you the best of luck if that is your choice to pursue. But in my case, I couldn't exceed a certain threshold of funds and as a result had to modify my goals to incorporate a large amount of free online learning in order to still cover my "CS bases" while not running out of funds. I think there are probably many other people faced with a similar dilemma, so I am cataloging my tactics here on this blog. There is hope if you can't afford college (even public university), and I truly believe that not being able to afford it should never be a hindrance to anyone who dreams of becoming a computer scientist. I found salvation particularly at my public library, and as such I consider the Topeka Public Library to be my alma mater. I received no degree nor certificate from any college in CS (not even an Associates), yet I was picked for my internship as well as my first job as a result of what I had taught myself at my public library. I think "self-taught" is a little deceptive as a word, especially when the result of my education was thanks to the efforts and good will of many educators who responded to the crazy potential that the internet afforded. So I call it "Holm Schooling," since even home schooled kids aren't thought of just teaching themself everything they know from thin air. Something has to be inclusive of the necessity of open source authors, and that's why I created "Holm Schooling" as an idea. This is possible only because of open source, philanthropic computer scientists. Thank you so much for the opportunity to flourish as a computer scientist debt-free. Thanks to that I maxed out my 401k and IRA and invested in 100% index funds thanks to the tactics outlined by [Mr. Money Mustache](https://www.mrmoneymustache.com) and [JLCollins](https://jlcollinsnh.com/stock-series/), and as such a life that was marred by mental illness and dim prospects for the future, approaching homelessness if I'm being honest, is now infinitely optimistic and rewarding. Glad I put my trust in open source ever since I discovered linux in ninth grade. A community that doesn't let you down or drown, as long as you're willing to take initiative yourself.

So let's follow this axiom in our time here at Holm School: You Don't Need to Spend a Cent to Learn Computer Science. It might require radical praxis and some crazy new rules to fulfill, but who's against radical praxis and crazy new rules!??! Debt blows, especially when you want to sock away money in index funds when you're young but you're stuck siphoning off your earnings. Let's avoid that icky feeling as much as possible and live our life on a second tenet: Avoid Debt as Much As Humanly Possible. Pay for everything in cash rather than credit (and that includes cars and university), and you'll safeguard yourself from having other financial obligations while you're young other than the goal of socking away as much cash as possible into tax-deferred index funds. Truly, the rewards of decades of compounding interest are enough to flabbergast even the most ardent anticapitalist and naysayer. Let's follow one more axiom: Your Youth is Dedicated to the Task of Saving As Much as Possible Into Index Funds. That one's a bit edgier, after all youth is precious and concerning yourself with FINANCIAL CONCERNS while young is just about as socially promoted as crack, but for us Holm Schoolers, it's an axiom. We're young and competent enough to be programmers, probably as a result of being able to read the future landscape of the global economy, and equally we're able to read the future landscape of our personal lives and put early extreme saving in tax-deferred accounts like an IRA or 401k as a priority. If you're saavy enough to teach yourself how to program software, you are saavy enough to follow the very comprehensible, non-rocket science steps that enable financial independence. Our Holm Schooled lives are marked by reponsibility and forethought, not spontaneity nor the immaturity of playing dumb and not heeding the insights of intelligent Cassandras. Humanism isn't a curseword but a virtual Theology, one we're willing to keep abreast of in all it's cutting edge manifestations in blogs and podcasts as well as studying the historical lineage too in the form of public domain books and archives cataloging its development. We're fueled by philanthropy and mission, not the easiest ticket to success and the good life no matter what the community cost.

That's probably enough waxing, but you get where I'm coming from in my belief that you don't need to spend a cent on learning to program. If you don't turn your nose up at the thought of an open source book, you're probably emotionally prepared to save some serious moolah in this quest to become a programmer. Good for you. Microsoft tarried for years besmirching the open source community, painting it as deplorable and deviant, and that philosophy just sort of seeped into enterprise. I don't hold resentment over that, though, and just sort of laugh about their lack of foresight at what now amounts to a queer historical footnote (Microsoft is now an open source company). But obviously now the same sort of besmirching is happening in academia, arguing that college is indispensable to capitalism and the sacrifice of having a degree is some amount like a million dollars in lifetime earnings. Fortunately that probably isn't the case in computer science, because it's not particularly difficult to learn what universities teach especially in the day and age they willingly post their CS lectures on YouTube. But is that out of willingness or a sort of capitulation to the open source education movement? Honestly, I can't get behind their minds nor know the motivations of schools, but I'm guessing it's not 100% goodwill and mission. Maybe I'm paranoid but the growing importance of programming and open source as it spreads like wildfire on the tallgrass of the internet has to be a bit disconcerting to the efforts of academia to raise tuition as much as economically possible each and every year. What obviously needs to happen is the application of Moore's Law to CS Education, to reify it electronically so that it grows exponentially, and I think we're just at the cusp of that happening thanks to recent inventions like YouTube. Are things perfect? No, there will always be sacrifices. But are students graduating from college, something as basic as a universal human right, debt free in a modern liberal democracy? No, and that's truly disconcerting. I have to admit that online education might just be the future, as much as I hope for a future place for the traditional academy funded properly to not require student loans as is implemented in Europe. You can bet I'll be caucusing next year for Joe Biden and his goal of funding free community college without dipping into the contradiction of socialism like other candidates.

A lot of people tend to think of open source software as a sort of technological socialism. This is unfortunate, especially when free education is just about the defining crux of liberalism and its concomitant Enlightened belief in the free markets. There is nothing anticapitalist about having the belief that you should be investing in stock market index funds at age 22 instead of paying off a student loan for a service that is free in most other liberal democracies. It is socialism's expedited flourishing in liberal arts academia that has probably resulted in the blooming of tuition prices, as useless philosophies and their pomo degrees require disproportionate propping up as ideology deviates from real American culture. Hipster shit costs more, I think that's a basic American joke at this point. And academia is some true next level hipster shit. I laugh thinking about the theory books I read in my liberal arts courses, which of course were works of genius that demanded dissemination through the masses through more college courses taught by pomo's faithful disciples, not any of the crass moderates or conservatives or liberals that wandered naively into academia's halls. Shame no one "normal" was able to read the convoluted and forced prose these 'genius' authors wrote in. The obvious conclusion was to make sure people encountered postmodernism at an even earlier age, so that they could truly experience the joy of reading Lacan and Foucault! So pomo was wrapped up in the anodyne disguise of social justice, and the flow of identity politics out of academia and into the lower echelons of public education thanks to the herculean efforts of graduates of [ed schools](https://quillette.com/2019/03/06/how-ed-schools-became-a-menace-to-higher-education/) happened. And the oppressive history of Marxism continues to be explained away by eager acolytes, replacing a formerly humanistic curriculum of the history of democracy and science with a Marxist critique of science and liberalism. This, of course, serves zero value, and so the sustainability of the university collapses under its weight and in turn the university acts as vultures to the incoming freshman optimistic about postmodern social justice and demanding of ultra-left curricula, who are usually rich and white and able to bounce back from a prospectless education thanks to mommy and daddy's trust fund or, ironically, privilege. The circle of rich social justice warriors paying the fees of social justice warrior professors is what is causing the feedback loop that causes the explosion of tuition fees, as university higher ups realize that postmodernism, though gauche to the goals of a liberal arts humanist education, pays the bills (and then some!). STEM students just sit back and wonder WTF is going on, and why there are so many hipster "studies" majors and anticapitalists spitting on any manifestation of the military industrial-complex or modern technological society. Nevermind the irony that free trade contributes directly to global peace.

I digress. Fortunately we can sort of "divest" from the influence of humanities academia and their bizarro liberal arts departments just by using OER. I'm optimistic about the future, though. If Microsoft can become an open source company, than by all means we can take back the academy through free speech, free thought, and open discussions. The situation isn't hopeless, there isn't a zero sum game where in order for open ed to succeed academies must be razed. There's basically a panoply of choice for future computer scientists, and in that educational market competitivity is healthy and part of what makes living in America great. Pick and choose from the rich buffet that is offered to computer scientists. Drink from the cornucopia of CS EdTech offering what amounts to debt-free career starters, and eat from the horn of plenty that results when you mix STEM jobs with FIRE personal finance goals. What fortune our future holds, both for ourselves and for humanity. If you aren't tickled by the future prospects for civilization as a direct result of having computer science flourishing as a discipline, I suggest you think deeply about what the good life means. But I doubt there are many out there who aren't optimistic, other than the rogue postmodernist or curmudgeonly socialist who wanders onto my blog, so the statement is more rhetorical than prescriptive. Let's laugh and feast about the great predicament that we find ourselves in: the problem of burdensome student debt in America by students interested in computers has been mitigated by the 'crisis response team' of open source computer scientists and authors. That's the way things are supposed to happen! We'd be fools to turn our backs on the team effort. Let's use what we've been given and 'Holm School' ourselves into a prosperous future. The social obligation to attend an ever-more-costly university is gone, to those in the know! Be in the know and laugh at those enormous debts that cost you a million+ dollars at retirement when compounded at age 22, when you are at the outset of your career and have no guarantees about your ability to pay them back. What a quaint historical note! Someday I'll tell my kids about this.

The future is now, the future is open source educational technology. Though you'll miss the drugged out and drunken Bacchanalia that passes for libertarian university socialization these days, you'll have spent those weeknights (lol) sober and studying FIRE personal finance and the latest programming frameworks, both free, in order to retire early in your own hometown, with your lifelong friends and family and absolutely no regrets if that's what you want. Don't feel forced to participate in a broken, antihumanist system that requires you leaving your hometown when still young and unemployed. [Know who your enemies are](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antihumanism) and be a discerning consumer. If you're not getting burnt alive at university, chances are someone you care about is. Not everything has to be politically fueled, though, and sometimes just rationally evaluating whether you want to go into debt at a young age for something you can learn at home free online or at your public library can be a guidestone for the tough decisions you'll be faced with making at 18. Some people, in my opinion, are addicted to academia, and the repercussions are as grave as drug use. I admit I consider myself in this category, up until I read [100rsns](http://100rsns.blogspot.com/) I still thought I'd get a liberal arts masters or PhD whenever I could afford it. Fortunately nothing prevents me from downloading art history books from Library Genesis and reading them on my ipad in my room after working as a programmer. A degree would be an ironic and costly signal of my naivity and addiction to prestige more than something which I could employ at work or in life. My name is Ryan, and I am an addict (to prestige). I struggle every day not to sign up for an OMSCS degree before my tuition reimbursement vestment kicks in, or to take more classes at my public university in CS even when I'm employed as a programmer. Maybe a quick MALS degree here or there, when I'm feeling low! Even me, of all people, who has a blog and a github organization dedicated to learning CS for free online, thinks I need more degrees behind my name. What a vicious cycle. I wish I had never tried my first academy.

Good luck in your crafting of your future. Being a scientist is truly rewarding and life changing. What a insightful decision you've made; what a good head you have on your shoulders. Let me share what I've learned, to add just a single voice to the deep sea of more keen voices of programmers and scientists who have FIRE'd. Compound interest, Open Source, and Computer Science -- What a combination!


<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/RRd-zIeL5Bk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>