---
date: "2019-05-24"
title: "Get a Full Scholarship to the College in Your Hometown, and Don't Move to a Different City"
ghissue: 72
---

The best choice you can make in your life is to work hard in high school so that you earn a full ride scholarship to the public university in your hometown. Going to university for free or nearly free is very possible if there is a public university in your hometown. You'll be able to live at home, instead of spending hundreds of dollars of money on "rent" for a dorm room. Perhaps your scholarship will even cover the cost of a dorm room! If your hometown has a public university, don't squander the opportunity. You are blessed with a gift from the gods: there's a college in your hometown! Not having to pay rent in a foreign city will save you $600 a month! You can study computer science at a familiar university and a familiar public library! Would you go to high school out of state or in a different city when there is a high school in the same city? Of course not! The same logic applies to college: if there's a college in your hometown, of course you should go to it and live at home to save money. Your vehicle to a good life is in studying computer science for as cheaply as possible, not putting the horse before the cart and moving to another city before you even have your computer science training! You should wait to move to another city until you've secured a job in that city, not to attend college. Only move away from home if you have a source of income, and colleges are the complete opposite of that! Instead they are grossly overpriced and will burden you with debt at a young age, preventing you from investing in index funds in your 401k and IRA in order to gain compound interest for 40+ years. The thinking needs to change around college and the best option for judging which college you should go to needs to be the affordability ranked. You should go to whereever is most affordable, after including food and rent to tuition too. Usually this will be your hometown college. That's because nothing quite tops out living at home for four years while your main focus is on studying. Don't think that you can not live at home while you don't even have a job! You should live at home while attending college just like you live at home while attending high school. People don't get apartments while they're in high school. And people shouldn't get apartments while attending college if it's in your hometown.

Out of state college is the Rolls Royce of colleges. It is so expensive, it is criminal. There is a low return on investment, when you include travel, rent, and tuition expenses. A lot of students are told out of state colleges are "better" than their hometown college, and that hometown colleges are just "safety" schools. Unfortunately, with Open Education, you can learn from the best CS professors no matter where you attend (for free on the internet). With Library Genesis, the quality of your hometown college's library doesn't matter. You can learn computer science just as well at your hometown university than any private or out of state college. What's more important is to graduate with zero debt, so that you can sock away money in your IRA and 401k at age 22 for ten years so that it can compound for forty years, instead of paying off debt during that important time in your life. The later you wait to start investing, the less your returns. Roughly every 10 years your index fund investments double, so if you wait a decade to max out your 401k and IRA, you're cutting your yield in half by the time you retire. You shouldn't buy Rolls Royces you can't afford, and you shouldn't go out of state when you have the opportunity to attend college inexpensively in your hometown.

Neither should you move to another city in your state to attend a state university if there's one in your hometown. You're still stuck paying high rent prices (especially in those college towns that only exist because there's a university in them). State schools are a good option if there isn't a university in your hometown, but if there is it would be a wasted opportunity not to stay at home. Even in state college can become outrageously expensive when rent is incorporated to the total cost. Though staying in-state is better than going out of state, when it comes to learning computer science, since most of what you need to know can be learned at a public library, the university you attend matters less as long as your hometown college has a CS department.

Don't think you won't have any fun. Usually you'll be at the university library until 11pm anyway, so where you go to sleep for 7 hours doesn't exactly carry much weight for the amount of fun you have in college. You can still socialize on campus and off campus with your friends. In fact, you'll probably have more fun since you'll still be in contact with all your hometown friends, rather than uprooting yourself to an entirely different state. It's also a whole new experience to live in your hometown after you've turned 18, you have more freedom and you can really get a feel for what social activities are available in your hometown. Campuses usually have plenty of socialization spots, like the SU, so you don't need to use your "apartment" as a social activity spot. Keep it on campus or in other people's dorm rooms and just sleep at home when socialization and studying is over for the day. As long as you don't rush home as soon as classes are over, and instead pack lunch and dinner (a ziplock of lentils, peanut butter sandwiches, a tupperware of beans and rice), you can stay on campus and socialize with your friends. Just avoid home as much as possible, and just use it as a place to cook and sleep.

That's my advice: If you have a university in your hometown, it would be a wasted opportunity not to attend it, especially when college is so expensive. If you don't have a university in your hometown, I would recommend living at home still and doing the [$5200 F-You Degree](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree). You can explore other cities once you start securing jobs, doing in when you don't have the funds is just a horrible idea! You'll be glad you're debt free at 22-32 when your maxed-out 401k and IRA contributions, invested in 100% total stock market index funds, makes you a millionaire multiple times over by the time you retire at 60. After a decade of contributions, you won't even need to contribute any more and can put the remaining savings in a post-tax fund, which can [fuel an early retirement](https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2018/11/29/how-to-retire-forever-on-a-fixed-chunk-of-money/). Well worth the four years extra you spent at home! The earlier you start making frugal choices, even if that means not going to a prestigious out of state private college when you're qualified enough to get in to them, the earlier you'll become financially independent. 

In my case, my career didn't start until I went to my hometown college. After 6 years of unemployment from earning a liberal arts degree at an out of state private college, I just went for the most affordable computer science degree and that was obviously at my hometown college. I got an apartment nearby and walked to class. After three semesters of study, my department had some people come in from local companies, and I scored an summer internship on a web team because of my Treehouse learning. I now work for that company, doing web stuff. There's a lot to say for staying in your hometown, especially because you can remain close to your family. Running off to an out of state college isn't always the ticket to a successful career as it is marketed.
