---
date: "2018-08-27"
title: "Important Knowledge is in Books"
---

I am promoting book learning over video learning here at Holm School. In the day and age where MOOCs are ubiquitous and free concerning many topics of computer science, and public libraries subscribe to video tutorial sites like Lynda or Treehouse, what is the purpose of learning through books? There are no subscription-based software like Spotify for books, where you can borrow any book every written electronically for a set monthly fee. Books are expensive! And it seems to be antiquated technology compared to video tutorials. But books hold important knowledge, and participating in focused study of texts for four years during your college years can afford you essential knowledge that engenders a lifetime of skills to carry you through your years of work. You'll learn how to learn if you read computer science texts. In learning CS through texts, you'll participate in the long legacy of computer science as an academic discipline that has created the world we benefit from today thanks to technology. To foreswear books is a huge mistake, whether you're studying science or the liberal arts, because it teaches you how to have discipline and focus. You require quiet, non-distraction, and a desk where you can study. These are the environmental variables that promote creativity and introspective thought. You aren't just learning a topic when you read a book, the fact that you are being studious in a quiet space promotes synthesis of what you're taking in so that you can turn it into introspective thought.

The fact is, in the future books are going to be extremely cheap. We are in the process right now of digitizing the archive, and once that is complete books will be easily duplicated, electronically stored, and delivered to people's tablet computers. Books, which usually cost $10-35, will soon be available for $10 a month, like Spotify. There are many people that realize this and are trying to build video libraries as a way of preserving their high monthly subscription fees. Most computer science video tutorial sites cost $25-35 a month. Compared to $10 a month, it seems silly to pay the premium price when the end goal-- learning a computer programming language or framework-- is the same for both mediums. The fact is that video tutorials require a lot less thought to take in, you can just kind of auto-play them, so they seem like less work. But books are also powerhouses of information. Oftentimes they go much deeper into the frameworks and give specific detail that give you a greater understanding of the technology. To skip this depth, just to shave a few hours off the time you're obligated to study is a huge mistake. In the future, books will be written less frequently in exchange for more-frequent production of video tutorials. To think this is because the medium is better for tutelage would be gravely mistaken. Books require less server space to host, so creating video prevents piracy because it requires more bandwidth to share. Hence, instead of being freely shared through the internet, video tutorials are usually safely ensconced behind a paywall without much of a threat of being ripped. Books, on the other hand, are just one megabyte. They are very easy to transmit and store. Hence, they will be more difficult to monetize because if you are overcharging for the product, people will just resort to piracy. In the future ebooks will be extremely cheap while videos will be as costly as the companies can get away with charging.

Don't give up on books. Video tutorial companies want you to disqualify the entire spectrum of books as outdated and useless. Don't believe the hype, they are protecting their bottom line. Ebooks are so frugal that you can even read OER for free! The lack of production costs for ebooks permits authors to release computer science textbooks with open source licenses for no charge. This practice will only increase in frequency as ebooks become less and less expensive, and the potential for earning capital from books decreases as well. Because the capacity to learn from books is just as equal to video, you really stand to gain if you keep with OER, ebooks, and public library books. To be a good, capable reader is ensuring that you will be frugal both in study and scholasticism (reading textbooks and tutorial books), but also entertainment (reading books instead of subscribing to video streaming services). Reading is the super power of all frugal people. They are poised to be the best way to save money in the future, especially when someone creates a monthly subscription service that is only $10/month for all the books ever written. In my opinion we are at a precipice in which this service will come out within a decade. If you rely on OER and public library books for the time being, you will save money and earn yourself skills for employment all while keeping costs as low as feasibly possible. If your public library subscribes to video tutorial websites for free on your behalf, by all means take advantage of their selection. But if they don't, rely on OER and the public library's computer science stack as the principle means of learning computer science. Books promote healthy thought and creative invention, and you'll find that scholasticism is an important skill for anyone who works as an inventor in the knowledge economy. Scholasticism and your relationship to learning from books is almost the parallel of how you create quality products and technologies. You set up the same environmental parameters as when you read a book-- quietness, no distractions-- and instead of consuming a book produce a book. Because the circumstances are mirror images of each other, when you read a book you are practicing inventing at the same time. The skills are complementary, and the main reason reading books is such a valuable hobby and a deep personal investment.

Now is a great time to be a reader. Part of the main benefits of being a computer scientist is the joy you experience when you read a computer science text and understand it! Scholasticism is a wonderful society in which to participate. Though books have traditionally been very expensive, creating the demand for public libraries in the first place, ebooks are so cheap that it has created the demand for OER. This website's purpose is to aggregate the best computer science OER so that you can become a computer scientist at absolutely no cost except your internet expenses! If you are a capable reader, which comes about as a result of reading as often as you can, you can save a ton of money while training yourself in the art of scholasticism. The idea that scholasticism costs a lot of money because of college tuition is a myth! Public libraries are a great alternative to college libraries and permit you to spend hours a day reading and studying in a quiet location. Don't pass up the opportunity the public library and OER provides by permitting you to access computer science texts for free! You'll gain computer science skills while also improving your reading, which makes you a more critical thinker! Books are here to stay, as proof by the fact that there has yet to be a monthly subscription service invented. There is still room for innovation in their delivery and the benefits of this innovation will be cheaper books for everyone!

If you are frugal, you must also be a reader. Important knowledge is in books, and to think they'll just up and disappear ignores the very true technological feat that soon you'll be able to download at will every book ever written. It's probably a decade off. Learn computer science by reading and you'll be highly skilled in the subject matter while gaining the ability to learn anything else that is invented along the way. It's a win-win circumstance.

Read! You might learn something.