---
date: "2019-01-13"
title: "It’s Not About Moocs, It’s About the Public Library – A Book Review of Excellent Sheep"
ghissue: 17
---

Today I reread William Deresiewicz’s Excellent Sheep: The Miseducation of the American Elite on a whim after reading it last year. I remember this book positively, enough to want to reread it again, but on second read I was struck by some distinct ideological differences between myself and the author.

First, I would not promote liberal arts degrees as being extremely valuable and necessary for self-education. I’m an obvious fan of the liberal arts, I have an art history degree myself and spent four years in college in at least one humanities course each semester, but I would not promote studying liberal arts in college. College is expensive, and a liberal arts degree simply isn’t going to get you a job anywhere. Obviously there are the usual passages in the book that talk about how businesses value liberal arts degrees, but a simple check is whether businesses pay for tuition reimbursement for liberal arts degrees. Typically not, usually tuition reimbursement has to be for classes related to the job. Of course, there may be exception, but they are not the rule. The easiest solution to the cost of college is simply to download four years’ worth of humanities/Great Book courses taught at liberal arts colleges and just read the books yourself from the public library. This is free, and the idea that reading classics should cost money is all hype. Deresiewicz is a salesman of the liberal arts degree, but don’t believe what he is selling. The product is good, but the cost of it is astronomic if you buy it at college instead of the public library. In my opinion, it is not essential to discuss literature in a classroom, as classroom discussions usually only give you the opportunity to talk for about 30 seconds in the period of an hour, and otherwise reading a book alone should be enough to permit you to think critically about what you just read. You don’t need classroom discussion that cost twenty thousand dollars a year in order to learn from reading the classics.

Another complaint about the book is the pages dedicated to discrediting MOOCs. I’m not surprised an English professor sees no value in MOOCs, as classroom discussions are the raison detre of liberal arts professors’ salaries, but writing off MOOCs just shows why you should ignore the liberal arts (if it’s not completely free to you). His comparison makes sense and is seductive; of course, if you’re paying for college, would you rather take a Socratic seminar or a MOOC for your money? But that comparison is unjust, because MOOCs are free while college costs fifteen thousand dollars a year. If you ask me whether I’d take a MOOC or OpenCourseWare class on a computer science topic, or else pay $1000 to take an actual class, I would probably choose the MOOC coupled with some free textbooks from Library Genesis. The MOOC/OCW serves one purpose: to convey scientific topics for free to people who cannot afford college. The simple fact is, when I was studying computer science I reached a point where I ran out of funds to go to college. I had to turn to internet resources to continue my studies. And that’s where a MOOC is a valuable asset, because, even though it was incomparable to an actual college class, it permitted me to continue studying CS even when I didn’t have money.

I see this as a misunderstanding of what the issue is surrounding MOOCs. And just as his book shows, it is incredibly easy to write off MOOCs as a failure when you compare them to academia. But that’s not the comparison we should be making. We should be comparing Socratic seminars to public libraries, not MOOCs. Public libraries are colleges without the tuition cost. They supply you with an unlimited number of books at the expense of underserving you with regards to Socratic seminars. The wager is this: You’re more likely to grow as an individual from reading books, so we’re going to completely furnish you with free books, whereas classroom discussions are only ephemerally valuable, so we’re going to avoid the infrastructure cost associated with hosting classrooms and instead just focus on providing books. That’s a damn good wager, in fact I’m willing to place my bets that this model of self-education is what lives through the next century instead of expensive colleges. The simple fact that public libraries are now essentially on-demand online in the form of Library Genesis just shows how the public library model of reading at the expense of discussion is now escalating on a global scale. Library Genesis serves the entire planet the oeuvre of scientific books under the model of a public library. There is no equivalent of that for Socratic seminars (in some form of YouTube live discussions, or such) because that’s a failed self-education model. It literally costs you tens of thousands of dollars, when simply reading the book (the crux of the matter, truth be told) is free. In that sense, MOOCs are an extension of public libraries into lectures, in that now college classroom lectures are recorded and put on YouTube to be watched for free. That’s an extension of the public library model of extending the crux of the matter – the classroom lecture on a science topic – at the expense of sacrificing the classroom discussion, which cannot be digitized and archived and put online for free. That should be fine with you, because you learn from reading the book, not from discussing it to the point where you convey to your professor that you did the reading to the extent that you deserve an A. And in my opinion, that’s all Socratic seminars are, in actuality, at liberal arts colleges. Just students conveying to the professor that they did the reading. The idea that Socratic seminars are the crux of self-education is false. It is the reading of the (free from the public library) book, not the 30 seconds you are afforded in a classroom discussion.

And that’s why I’m not surprised Excellent Sheep ended with a completely unhinged final chapter. After appreciating the rest of the book for arguing for a liberal arts education, I was taken aback at the revolutionary tones of the final chapter, which argue for income distribution and basically class warfare. If that’s your conclusion for the reasons of defending the liberal arts, then even I am skeptical of the liberal arts. We don’t need revolution to ensure poor kids can go to college. We need to make sure that we use new technology to extend books and lectures to them for free on the internet. We need to make sure tablets and high speed internet are as affordable as possible. That’s going to be ensured through science, computer science, electrical engineering, and volunteer work by archivists. We need public libraries to extent beyond their four walls and serve books for free via internet databases, much like Library Genesis is doing, to ensure that kids can read science books even when they can’t drive or take the bus to the public library. We need to make sure that even if you can’t afford to college, you can succeed as a computer scientist that can start a career as a programmer even without in-person college classes under their belt. The idea that “moar college” is the solution to the problems engendered in our society by elite colleges is a laughing stock, and makes the entire book a bit of a farce that seemingly talked sweet nothings in your ear for nine tenths of a book only to turn into a conspirator in the last chapter. The solution is moar public libraries, not moar liberal arts degrees. And it just so happens that computer scientists have built some of the most incredible public libraries on the internet concerning computer science. Sure, it’s on the internet, but there isn’t much of a difference between deadwood and an ipad screen when you get down to the gritty details of reading words.

MOOCs aren’t the solution to college ills, because MOOCs aren’t college replacements but public library supplements. MOOCs aren’t a waste of time because they cost zero dollars. They are integrating the public library ethos in the domain of college lectures. Library Genesis takes the success of MOOCs and implements a college library for free on the internet for anyone to read any book they want in the topic of science. That’s the sort of thing that lets poor people get college-level educations for very affordable prices. Free textbooks coupled with free college lectures (in the form of MOOCs and OCW) are quite an admirable competitor to college classes, with their high price tag. Avoiding debt as a principle might motivate you to rely on free internet resources instead of paying for tuition, and you just might find that you are able to succeed as a programmer just as much as if you had gone to actual classes. Because the real crux of the matter is the books and the lectures, not the Socratic seminar. That’s why the solution to college debt crisis isn’t more liberal arts degrees, but promoting the liberal arts self-education that is possible through your public library or Library Genesis. Reading the classics doesn’t require classrooms if it requires you to go into debt. Self-education should be extremely affordable, if not free. Nothing about self-education requires big bills or loans for debt. If you keep the principle that liberal arts should be free, because learning computer science online is free, then you’ll find yourself receiving a liberal arts education by reading books through your public library, without the sort of debt that can suck the life out of you when you graduate at 22 and can’t find a job.
Books used to cost money, but we’re reaching the critical point where entire libraries are digitized and book online for free. A single public library, instead of serving one city, now serves the entire world online. It’s a jump in scale that is complemented by MOOCs and OCW on YouTube, which provide the meat and potatoes of computer science lectures for free and on-demand. It’s an amazing time to be a computer scientist or someone interested in the liberal arts. To enroll in college if it costs you money would be a huge mistake. By becoming a computer scientists without debt can afford you a life of financial independence, in which you can read and write as much as possible when you’re early retired. To think that starting off your life with a $60,000 debt just because you like to read is exploitation at its finest. Don’t be exploited just because you like to read. In a few years it will be seen as insane that people paid money (a lot of money!) for books, when they are all available on-demand online for $15 a month. Reading will experience a renaissance, and when every textbook on computer science ever written is available for free on Library Genesis, it is hard to justify paying tuition. MOOCs might be a failure compared to college. But when you compare what’s offered at public libraries around the world, which are augmented by services such as OCW/MOOCs, you see a much more competitive picture. Public libraries are being augmented by archives such as MOOCs and OCW, and they’re making the practice of going into debt to read books that you could read for free through your public library appear increasingly arcane. YouTube is essentially a public library. Library Genesis is essentially a public library. Public libraries are going to replace colleges as people realize there’s no need to go into debt for what can be (to a high degree) duplicated for free at a public library.

And that’s why I reject the conclusion of Excellent Sheep. Professors don’t make literature come alive, the authors who wrote the original book make literature come alive by fiat of what they created. We need more free and ubiquitous books, not more liberal arts professors. While liberal arts students have been getting PhDs in order to serve as professors in cush jobs, computer scientists have been digitizing the world’s books and putting them online for free download. Who do you think is going to take deeper steps into solving poverty? I laugh when I think about someone willingly believing liberal arts professors are going to be the solution. Their modus operandi is simply to suck tens of thousands of dollars out of people, rich and poor, who like to read books. It is an elaborate operation that replaces books, which are available free at public libraries, with Socratic seminar which, arguably at best, are valuable seemingly only because they aren’t reproducible for free by public libraries and internet archives. So what? So what about Socratic seminars? I’m not a philistine that doesn’t understand the liberal arts just because I think reading books is more important than discussing it with 20 other people who probably didn’t even do the reading, for $15,000 a year. I’m willing to be bashed by liberal arts professors like Deresiewicz for not appreciating the beauty of the Socratic seminar. I firmly believe it is not worth the money, for the very reason that it can’t be offered for free online. If that’s the case, it’s probably a scam.
