---
date: "2018-08-30"
title: "A Good Jordan Peterson Video"
---

I don't spend a lot of time exploring Jordan Peterson, I much rather enjoy basing my critiques of postmodernism on science (i.e. Sokal, Gross/Levitt, Koertge), but this is a good video and Jordan Peterson is an alright guy. If you are a scientist in any regard, please don't get a liberal arts degree in college if you are remotely interested in art or literature, it is bizarro land of word salad literary theorists who don't make any sense and probably did too much peyote in the sixties and fried their brain but are required reading every semester and on every paper you write. Your liberal arts professors will just call you too dumb to understand their ~*~*~brilliant literary theories~*~*~* if you are confused or in any way disagree, all while taking tens of thousands of dollars from you each year as though calling you too stupid for private skool were an education. And then after four years you won't even be able to get a job with a liberal arts degree except at Chipotle's. But for only three minutes in length this video explains the basics quite well, so I would like to post it on my blog even though I might be fired for it. YOLO! Liberal arts colleges are broken and exploitative. I disagree with the video in saying that it's tax-payer supported though. Most of this problem arises from private universities.  Sure, they're nonprofit, so they get tax benefits, but they aren't actively propped up by tax payers. Public universities are rad as hell, I support them 100%. Study computer science in a public university if you are interested in art and literature and not having your money milked away from you from anti-capitalists, el oh el. Or just unschool using this website. YOLO.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/LquIQisaZFU?rel=0" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>