---
date: "2018-08-30"
title: "Lectures are Books"
---

I am going to write about one of the most difficult roadblocks to a student getting over their feelings of obligation to pay for an expensive bachelors degree. This roadblock is the idea that lectures are non-reproducible, that they exist outside of the economy of ebooks and that because of this, the high costs of college study must be justified. But in the days of cell phones being full-fledged video production machines, this concern does not hold water. A college lecture can be recorded digitally and uploaded to YouTube for free. This can be viewed an infinite amount of times for no hosting cost, making the audience for the lecture unbound from the size of seats in the classroom.

One problem is students think lectures are actually discussions. This is not the case, believe me. Once you spend enough time at college, you realize that most often today professors rely on a powerpoint display and talk at the powerpoint for an hour and a half. This is not criticism, I think in general this can be an effective means of relaying information. But to think that this format is impervious to digitalization can't be justified. There is nothing about it that a cell phone can't be used to record. In fact, sometimes its easier just to skip the camera and screencast while speaking with perhaps a wacom included in there. The formats are essentially the same: a cellphone-recorded lecture and a screencast with audio convey the same information and neither compromise the function of the instruction. Classroom discussion rarely happens, and usually it's not much beyond the people wanting to convey the message that they read the required reading. Discussion is such a small side-effect that the notion of paying tuition just for it alone is a real sunk cost, in the day and age of open education. Discussion doesn't turn you into some free-thinking renegade that soars at conversation and dazzles everyone with your social wit and charm. Maybe in the humanities? (haha, no). Certainly not in computer science. Not to say that there isn't room for philosophy of CS, but you don't usually think of philosophical discussions as the cornerstone of a computer science class.

My question is just to unbundle the illusion of college. If you are a good instructor, why would you limit your instruction to 30 students maximum instead of recording yourself and putting it on YouTube so that millions of people could benefit from your lecture? Again, I emphasize that with screencasting and perhaps a wacom, you can convey all information contained in a normal college lecture with a whiteboard and digital projector. People are facing student debt crisis because the economics of traditional college classrooms is unsustainable: You pay premium prices to be the elite 30 students that hear a semester long lecture by a good professor that no one else is allowed to attend and hear. You are paying for exclusivity. But this exclusivity is annoying at best and toxic at worst. You are hiding education behind a paywall that working class students are increasingly unable to pay for. There are consequences to the uber-inflation in tuition price.

The cost of non-public college is so immense that I doubt it has much of a future, especially when you consider that open education will continue to be recorded and served on YouTube or Google for free. The economics of the college lecture rely on students believing that classroom discussion and interaction is so important that digital lectures are worthless and in fact detrimental. The fear is that if a student studies online they will be stunted, a social mute with such dwarfed social cognition that they will be unable to hold up a conversation with anyone, especially with an interviewer during their job search. They will lack social grace and be so awkward that they won't have any friends and they will be left in the dirt and forgotten, victims to the will of hoodlums and street rats. If you do not believe online learning has stigma, then you probably don't question why people pay a quarter of a million dollars for four years of knowledge they could learn for free through YouTube. But online learning has a huge stigma. That's the reason that there are thousands of quality computer science classes on the internet for free but people spend money they don't have to study at a bricks and mortar college.

I propose an observation: Everything you need to know to be a programmer in life you aren't going to learn in just four years. You are going to have to study programming for a lot longer if you hope to produce quality computer science. And yet college ends at four years. If you are going to have to rely on the internet to learn new programming skills once you're done with college, why not avoid paying for college and learn programming skills on the internet four years earlier? It's basically unavoidable anyway, you have to gain the ability to study by yourself online if you intend to keep abreast of your field. There's nothing particularly different that occurs at year five of study. The knowledge doesn't become less valuable or any other weird permutation that justifies online study when the first four years don't. It's just a continuation of being a lifelong learner and programmer. Computer Science developed the internet to perpetuate itself. Computer Science created OpenCourseWare to perpetuate computer science classes. Computer Science is ensuring that in the future any knowledge you hope to glean about computer science is readily available for free. The only limit is your knowledge of the topic and time/investment, not the amount of money you're willing to hand over. Part of learning computer science is knowing the intricacies of what is feasible with computation and computers. And at the current moment in history, with all the internet services like hosting and cheap pocket computers, learning a bachelor's degree equivalent of computer science is possible for free. If you fail to grasp this concept, you fail a bit as a computer scientist. If you do understand this concept-- you've seen the OER, the OpenCourseWare, the YouTubes and the Public Library Stacks-- then you realize that the only hindrance to actually doing it for yourself is energy, or more probably the social stigma of being self-educated.

The reluctance of current professors at universities to digitize their courses out of resentment towards technology. Professors are sometimes resentful of technology, and it's a great reason why, as a computer scientist who develops technology, you should be skeptical of expensive colleges: You are trying to encourage technology, yet the resentment of college professors towards digitization of classes points towards their hatred of technology. You aren't really going to glean what you want to glean as a computer scientist from people that are passive aggressive towards computer science and technology. Computer Science _is_ self-education. Computer Science _is_ online learning. Computer Science _is_ free and non-paywalled. Those are central tenants to modern computer science, in my opinion, and ultimately the infrastructure is in place for you to reap the rewards of many past decades of hard labor to set this infrastructure up for your generation.

But the hindrance is stigma. The hindrance is your fear of ostracism. The hindrance is your fear of being made fun of or devalued. The stigma of free and online learning keeps kids buying private, elite lectures that they can't afford. It makes them take out student loans for tens of thousands of dollars at the first threat of difference. Stigma is what keeps kids paying for an economically unsound and unsustainable model/relic from the past that, cult-like, outright denies modern technology and its cost-saving benefits. I'm not saying the college lecture isn't helpful, it's awesome stuff. All I'm saying is that every lecture any professor gives can easily be digitized and uploaded for free. And that classroom discussion and interaction isn't worth the tens of thousands of dollars you have to pay for building expenses, maintenance of lawns, sports teams, student gyms, and fraternities. Plus the profit motive that is manifesting itself as an aggressive plotting against the digital future that doesn't rely on paywalls, manufactured exclusivity, or tuition by promoting stigma and the self-educated. Expensive colleges aren't in the blueprint of the future. You can go through the five stages of loss-- denial anger bargaining depression acceptance-- regarding the end of the era. Think how obsessed students are with the SAT! Those obsessions are going to be seen as quaint when all knowledge-- books, lectures, music, film-- is available for free on the internet. I'm not proposing stigma against college students, I just want to emphasize how social dynamics are changing from college-centric learning to internet-centric learning. Personally I don't prefer one over the other, except that internet-centric learning just happens to be $45 a month for a broadband subscription while colleges sometimes cost a quarter of a million dollars. Until college becomes free, I will promote self-education through public libraries and Open Educational Resources, which are free. Student debt is dangerous.

Just like books are becoming cheap and openly licensed as they become digitized, so too lectures will be. That is because lectures are books, even though they don't at first look like it. They just require video and audio instead of text. But they will become free and ubiquitous as computers and hosting becomes free and ubiquitous too. There is nothing special about a lecture that can't be conveyed through a book. There is nothing special about a college lecture that prevents it from being hosted for free on the internet. The only difference is effort, and most college professors balk at the idea of digitizing their semester class. . They rely on exclusivity to earn the tuition that keeps them funded. Professors hold a privileged spot in society and they fear the implications of anyone learning from them for free, which they see as skimming. They paid a lot for their PhD and are looking to benefit economically from their investment. But professors probably won't become unfunded if they digitize their classes. They probably won't be useless in the future economy that prioritizes computer scientists. No one is harmed by helping poor people. There is no opportunity cost to helping students who can't afford community college. Yet they act like they will be if they digitize anything related to college, and that's why they still use $150 textbooks and charge $15,000 a year for tuition instead of spending their time uploading their knowledge to YouTube. Fortunately, some professors are doing this and they will be the standardized texts for future generations of programmers.