---
date: "2019-05-22"
title: "Why Holm School Doesn't Make Content"
ghissue: 70
---

I've often contemplated quitting my job and start making tutorial videos full time in the vein of Khan Academy. It's tempting, but I reason that I haven't had much training in teaching other than working a few years in EdTech and going to a college that emphasized student-led socratic seminars. At some point in my life, I will probably get a Masters in Education from University of the People just to embellish my potential as a computer science educator. However, I'm not interested in working as a teacher in a school because I firmly believe a great benefit to all of humanity is working online, free and open sourcely. I am starting off with Holm School, which I have been doing for nearly a year, however results are very slow to tell the truth: I probably get seven hits a week. I'm not giving up, though, because I believe there is currently not a voice other than EBookFoundation's [github page](https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books/blob/master/free-programming-books.md) covering computer science OER, and I believe OER, even though it has the potential to be usurped by the creation of a "Spotify for Books" app or possibly easily pirated books in the form of Library Genesis and its clones, is a strong contender for playing a big role in the daily lives of computer science students. In college, I created open source electronic music which was copyleft at the time but has since been public domain'd. I really enjoyed that experience, though of course I made no monetary gain nor had any practical success, which forced a career change into computer science in my early thirties. After having great success studying computer science for online through my public library's free Treehouse subscription, as well as a variety of OpenCourseWare classes aggregated in the [aGupieWare post](http://blog.agupieware.com/2014/06/online-learning-intensive-bachelors.html), I became a convert for online computer science education and directly pursued a job in computer science EdTech for my first programming job. While I enjoyed working as a full stack developer, I didn't necessarily feel like I made much progress as an Educator, and so I continue to work as a full stack programmer instead of a computer science educator. So far, in terms of facilitating the learning of computer science by more competent educators, I am happy.

So Holm School most likely won't ever create original training content, although that obviously is where the "money" is. Instead, I am sticking with my focus on metaeducation, which I've been exploring since my college senior thesis where I, in one part, focused on an famous Reed art history professor from the early 20th century's "Recommended Art History" reading list that he created, and its role on my own art historical education in my self study outside of class. I think one of the interested side effects of being interested in open source since I was 14 is that I grew up teaching myself how to program and create web pages, and most of it was free through the internet. As a kid learning to program, I didn't have money to purchase books (though I bought a few unix books for a few dollars at a discount bookstore) but I did have the internet, so I learned that way. It's not my preferred means of education, but when it's the only means, you have to learn to use it regardless of preference. Being broke and wanting to learn computer science, I realized that many aspects of computer science could be learned through OpenCourseWare for free. In that regards I never bought more books than were required for my classes, and instead supplemented my classes with OpenCourseWare and YouTube. It kept costs low and resulted in great progress in my studies. Halfway through my academic studies, Library Genesis came out, and that changed my entire outlook on digital learning. It was clear with sufficient cultural influence, Library Genesis could spur the creation of a Spotify-like app for books. Having nearly every computer science book ever written on Library Genesis, and eventually this forthcoming app, will allow for affordable study of computer science by anyone, anywhere.

So until that time comes, at which point Holm School will start a curated list of recommended textbooks on that Spotify-like app, I will collate a CS curriculum using free OER. While OER has its downsides, especially the irony of "free books" in the day and age of Library Genesis, I think it is a great option for anyone interested in computer science that doesn't have the means to purchase expensive CS textbooks. I myself never used OER because I had Library Genesis, but perhaps someone out there who morally objects to Library Genesis will find use for Holm School's OER curriculum. A year into the project, I find nearly zero success for my efforts. However, I am a big believer in unschooling and I think the future is bright for impoverished students interested in computer science thanks to companies like Treehouse and University of the People. I think it is important not to compete with these companies and start my own computer science school, but to imbellish the rich opportunities for impoverished CS students in this day and age by crafting open source curriculum that points the student to these affordable but useful resources.

So I aim to curate a useful list of free and affordable computer science curriculum, rather than create one myself. I don't think there's much I can contribute to the realm of recorded instruction anyway, considering professional educators are already doing so and fortunately making it available on YouTube. I think I can help the open source community by pointing students to these various resources, in a way that covers most of the learning objectives in the modern computer science curriculum. I'm not looking to destroy the university, I'm merely looking to its manifestation on free media nodes on the internet, so that people that can't afford a university degree (or even a University of the People degree) can still study computer science properly. At this point in my life, I believe this to be thoroughly possible, especially since I kickstarted my computer science at a public university for a low cost but eventually moved my primary place of study to free internet resources as I realized it wasn't worth the cost of even a low cost university in my hometown. I firmly believe that universities have priced themselves out of the discerning and frugalperson's contention, and that open source and nonprofit CS education will be the future of learning computer science for disadvantaged students.

The interesting thing about internet learning is that, once a competent OpenCourseWare has been published or a thorough YouTube course has been uploaded, there's very little need for anyone else to make their own attempt at the curriculum until that course is out of date. It's the very principle of Don't Repeat Yourself applied to digital education. In that sense I've looked at the current landscape of production of courses on YouTube and realized that there's no need to be the one who makes content, but rather there will probably always be a need to update the compendium of all those free classes into an curriculum. So Holm School won't make content because I simply don't have the time, and personally I don't like editing video footage (especially since that would require purchasing cameras and software as well as having a space to record, which I currently don't have). I hope Holm School will still be useful and perhaps even gain a following as a useful contributor to modern CS education.

My goal will always be to fulfill as much the goals of the Great Libraries, as told by Carl Sagan. Not as a creator of content, but as a library and curator. Perhaps I should have named myself "Holm Library", although I would have lost the sweet pun of "Holm School":

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/4BPc1WBEmmA" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

As always, let me know how I can improve or let me know some suggestions for increases in scope and outreach. My recent interest in financial independence has influenced me to perhaps create some more guides for good investing and personal finance, and so I'll probably be making more curriculums regarding that on Holm School. I think frugality is a great skill for computer scientists, which is obviously reflected in my desire to make a completely free OER curriculum. Even if you can afford educational materials, saving your money and uses OpenCourseWare is a great way to put your money to better use when you're young (i.e. in index funds).

And of course, while I did make this blog post, I do hope eventually to make a few YouTube videos about my beliefs as a second medium to the website/github. We'll see. I have a Wacom so I'll probably use that.
