---
date: "2019-05-23"
title: "On Being a Computer Scientist With A Mental Illness and Finding Happiness"
ghissue: 71
---

One of the greatest tragedies I’ve faced in my life thus far is my development of a mental illness at the age of 18. It feels like an embarrassment more than a tragedy, but that is probably clouded by the culture of stigma surrounding mental illness in America. It’s not an embarrassment, because it’s genetic, but ultimately the amount and severity of failure I’ve felt in my adult life as a result of my mental illness is so severe the easiest way to categorize it is as an embarrassment. I have schizophrenia, which was diagnosed at age 23 after five very unproductive years at college, though I did receive my degree. I went into college thinking I was going to earn a PhD and be a professional academic, but that was not to be. Because I have a mental illness, I struggled in college and barely even graduated. I went from being second in my senior class to having flunked out of college in the course of one and a half years. The onset of my mental illness was unexpected, since mental illness, though present, isn’t predominate in my family. I personally didn’t know anyone with mental illness, so I wasn’t aware of its symptoms and signs. As a result, I struggled for three years of college not understanding why my grades were suffering, I wasn’t able to complete homework, I failed in writing good essays, and I wasn’t doing my reading. I was frustrated and angry. I now know I was experiencing the onset of schizophrenia, and that there was nothing I could have done short of going on medication. Unfortunately I was “high functioning” enough that no one suspected I had schizophrenia, so I never received a diagnosis and never received medicine. As a result I went through most of college hearing voices and experiencing delusions, but I still managed somehow, out of sheer hard work in the face of bizarre symptoms, to earn my degree.

My degree, however, was useless. Because I did so poorly in classes and on my essays, some of my professors refused to write letters of recommendations for me. My career as an art historian was dead because I couldn’t go to graduate school. I also graduated a few months before the great recession in October 2008 (with a silly liberal arts degree), so I couldn’t land a job when I returned to my hometown from school. It took a few months before my erratic behavior landed me in the hospital and I was diagnosed with schizophrenia after a suicide attempt. Unfortunately the medicine I was put on in January 2009 didn’t work very well, plus many of my "counter-cultural" friends had told me that psychiatric medicine was dangerous, so I stopped taking my medicine. As a result, I spent the next six years unemployed and very unwell. There is a lot to regret about this time, just its utter uselessness to me as a person as well as the burden I was to me family when I was sick. I don’t cope well without medicine, and as a result had many more suicide attempts, one that landed me in the hospital for example. Losing out on six years of working life when you’re 24-30 is really quite tragic, and as a result I will always be behind in my savings compared with someone who doesn’t have a mental illness. But I don’t want to spend more than two paragraphs about the “dark times,” because this story is ultimately quite uplifting. In October 2014, after landing in the hospital again, I was put on new (injectable) medicine that worked very well for my symptoms. The medicine was new and although I had no money to pay for it, I was placed on a Patience Assistance Plan that covered my costs for a small, manageable amount.

The new medicine was basically a cure. I no longer experienced psychosis, nor heard voices, nor experienced delusions, nor was suicidal. I quickly learned that I had great power now that I was cured, and very quickly I set about applying to colleges in order to study towards a STEM degree. I applied to KU’s aerospace engineering department as well as Washburn’s computer science department. For some reason I was rejected from KU for not meeting their “Calculus” requirement even though I took AP Calc when I was 16, so I wound up going to Washburn at the start of 2015. Learning computer science was a much better choice, because I was within walking distance of Washburn, which saved money rather than having to drive everyday to Lawrence, and I already basically knew how to program, since I taught myself BASIC in sixth grade. Because I had a bachelor’s degree, I didn’t need to pursue a full curriculum but could instead only take CS classes, which afforded me much extra time that first semester (where I took one class – Introduction to Programming), and as a result I spent every waking hour studying programming from my textbook. For example, though not assigned, I did every single programming exercise at the end of each chapter of my textbook, and read ahead to the extent that I completed the second semester’s homwork and reading by the end of the first semester. For the first time since high school, I received good grades. I no longer had difficulty reading and focusing. My medicine fixed all the hindrances I had to my studying.

It was quite remarkable to not have psychosis. I quickly forgot what it was like to have a mental illness and I prepared for my life as a computer scientist by working as hard as I could while in school, sometimes reading up to four extra textbooks in each of my classes. After one month of not doing too well, whereupon I implemented my “do every exercise problem” self study, I then reached the point wherein I set the curve for every test I took (except one) for every test I took for the rest of my two year tenure at Washburn. It was quite remarkable to go from being someone who flunked out of college, in a liberal arts curriculum even, who couldn’t even get the professors they worked with for two years to write a recommendation, to becoming a good student. It was like having my high school brain back, and sometimes I wonder what could have been if I had had this medicine when I was 18, instead of spending 12 years without it.

Because I quickly found myself employable as a programmer, I had to plan for what employment would be like with a mental illness. Obviously succeeding as a student with mental illness was one thing, but finding employability as someone with a mental illness was something that, up until that point, I had had zero experience with. I did experience insomnia a few times at my job, which results from my medicine not working for a night every two months or so, which resulted in me being an hour late to work a few times, which caused reprimand from my boss. I told him I did have a mental illness, and as a result sometimes experienced insomnia, but I have a sleeping pill prescription that usually covers those situations, however sometimes it’s difficult to remember to take the pill when I’m experiencing psychosis. My boss was understanding and said that he had friends and family with mental illness too, so he understood.

Eventually I reached the comfort level with my coworkers that I told them I had a mental illness. Everyone seemed pretty understanding, though like I mentioned, the embarrassment I feel from having a mental illness is quite strong and I feel insecure. I’m not sure how I would rate telling my coworkers, but it cleared some longstanding questions that surrounded me such as why I’m a straightedger (it’s compulsory, not necessarily by choice). I even tried talking about my mental illness sometimes with coworkers, but usually they changed the topic quickly so I learned that it wasn’t a very good conversation, even with friends. I did experience psychosis very strongly one day (the first time, other than my insomnia bouts, where I experienced psychosis), and as a result was in psychosis and didn’t go to work the next day and the following day. I turned off my cell phone because that’s what the psychosis was telling me to do, so after two days of non-communication my coworkers checked in on me at my apartment to make sure I wasn’t dead. I didn’t even tell them I was experiencing psychosis, just told them I was still alive, so in the future I will have to tell my coworkers when I’m experiencing psychosis and they check in on me. My mom soon contacted my boss after being unable to get in contact with me, and so she quickly flew out to my city in order to help me and I found her at my door a few days later, where she helped me get back to health (I wasn’t eating, for example). I hate that I have to involve my coworkers with my mental health at all, I wish I was completely autonomous, but even a 99% success rate with my medicine still results, in this case for example, in a few days of psychosis every four years. My mom was very thankful to my coworkers for checking in on me twice (once they even at down with me and had me eat some lentils), so when she was in town she gave them a small gift in appreciation. I’m obviously very fortunate to have coworkers like that, and I devised some good strategies for what to do if I ever experience psychosis again when I’m living alone. Now I have a new job in my hometown, so I’m living at home, so I don’t have to worry about this since I’m always going to have someone to check in on me every day. Beyond this blip, I’ve had great success working on my medicine, and it seems to really hold up everday in such a way that I can work without interference from my illness.

At my current job no one knows that I have schizophrenia, though it is likely this post will change that. NAMI has long asked for people with mental illness to be open about their having a mental illness in order to decrease stigma in America, but usually I prefer privacy. I was, however, listening to a recent [podcast by Mad FIentist](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=huSsCgijxy8) wherein he talks with a computer scientist with a mental illness, and it compelled me to talk about my own mental illness in order to decrease stigma too. If you need to know more about mental illness, I suggest [NAMI’s](https://www.nami.org) online resources.

Ultimately I think I’m going to succeed as a computer scientist with a mental illness. However, there are some concerns, as my most recent insurance company rejected my medicine and wants me to be put on risperdal as a result of their drug policy. Risperdal, if you don’t know, is an older generation schizophrenia drug that results in side effects like permanent tremors called tardives dykinensia. There is no chance in hell I’m going on risperdal, so if my healthcare provider fails to convince my insurance company to pay for Invega Sustenna, and I am rejected for Patience Assistance because I’m employed, I will have to quit my job. It’s such a shame that such good medicine is so expensive that insurance companies refuse to cover its cost. I really feel guilty that my insurance company has to pay so much, because that raises the premiums for my coworkers, and I hate that there isn’t a generic I can be put on. I don’t see why schizophrenia medicine should cost so much, because schizophrenics usually don’t find employment, so it’s rare they’ll have enough money to cover the cost of the medicine. It’s so sad that this medicine has made me employable, and now I’m going to fall into unemployability because of my insurance. Very frustrating, as you can imagine, as I like my job and don’t want to quit. But the medicine is expensive, and it will be many years before a generic is created. Until then, I’ll just have to find a job that pays for my medicine and won’t force me to “try” risperdal by mandate.

Being cured of schizophrenia is just a small miracle. Though I find myself starting a career at 32 instead of 22 (it’s like an entire decade was just sucked into the void), I’m glad that it’s later rather than never. I’m very thankful that the pharmaceutical industry created the medicine that cures my symptoms. Most people are against “Big Pharma,” but I’m its biggest fan. I’m hoping that by saving hard for the next decade I can make up for lost time, in terms of being financially secure. Perhaps one day I’ll even own a small home, which would be quite a miracle (I did live by myself in an apartment successfully the past two years, so I’m optimistic). I’m hopeful about my life for the first time since I was 18, and I quite often feel happy. I realize there’s a lot of stigma about mental illness in America, but not too many people read this blog, so I’m hoping I won’t face anyone who tries to make me feel bad for having a genetic disease (they exist, no doubt). Alas, I can’t do anything about my genetics. There have been some real ups and downs in my life, and I hope for a future where schizophrenia is diagnosed at an early age and corrected with medicine, so that no one else has to squander their college years unsure of what exactly is happening as everything crumbles around them. General awareness about the disease would help too. Perhaps one day a cheap genetic test will let people know well before age of onset that they need to start schizophrenia medicine at 18. I feel lucky to live in the day and age where injectable monthly medicine is essentially a cure for my schizophrenia. This is an experiment about what it’s like to be open about having a mental illness in the Midwest instead of the East Coast. Results won’t be as good, of course, but that’s all the more reason to try in a way that I can to decrease stigma.