---
date: "2019-08-01"
title: "My Philanthropic Manifesto"
ghissue: 92
---

I think with some coordinated philanthropy by wealthy people in each state, public libraries could solve the student debt crisis once and for all for the rest of time. My solution does not rely on public universities, because they have proven themselves too self interested to serve the populace and instead of being a university for all citizens, they are so expensive that they are only for the wealthy. Getting a huge student loan just to go to a public state university is probably one of the biggest let downs imaginable to young people.

So my solution comes down to this: Focus my philanthropy on solutions that only focus on computer science departments, so that money isn't wasted funding liberal arts departments that force pomo down young people's throats and don't prepare them for any labor or provide skills. So that thins out the focus of the philanthropy: Any educational institution with a liberal arts department is axed.

Unfortunately, there don't seem to be any public universities that are willing to excise the cancer that is pomo liberal arts departments from their payroll. So instead, STEM students have to fund "philosophers" who think science is colonial, patriarchal, subjective, blah blah blah. Since students at public universities have no option to opt out of funding liberal arts departments, they should avoid them and their overhead. Find a STEM-only educational resource, and go there.

So my personal philanthropy won't focus on computer science departments at any public university. That's okay, because [I'm not comfortable funding a cult](https://www.chronicle.com/article/Is-Graduate-School-a-Cult-/44676). That's an ethical decision on my part, but I think it's the better one given how many kids are winding up with massive student debt just going to in-state public universities. I think that's because of the bloated liberal arts departments that provide zero utility to students while maximizing the pomo brainwashing in hopes of ushering in the revolution. mmkay, good luck on that. I'm not sure what utility there is in teaching anti-capitalism in the twenty first century but I guess I support free speech (I just don't want to be forced to pay for it as part of my tuition fee).

This leaves us with a few options: Private nonprofit universities that only teach computer science, and private companies that only teach computer science but are not nonprofit. While I would prefer to see a nonprofit service teach computer science to the degree that universities teach computer science, at this point there aren't any services like that. Furthermore, only a few private companies work with public library licensing, the few I can think of are Treehouse and Safari Books. Furthermore, to further filter down the focus of our philanthropy, nonprofit online universities that only have a computer science department thins out to one candidate: University of the People. It's quite a shame that there aren't any other nonprofit universities that only teach computer science. It's quite a good model for an online university: Only teach computer science in order to keep prices as low as possible while maximizing direct utility for the student by teaching one of the most important STEM skill in existence. Why University of the People is the only team providing this important and scalable feature is completely bewildering to me. Given the import of CS, there should be hundreds of competing universities that only have one computer science department, focusing all their online teaching to offering the best CS curriculum at bare-bones rates. I think this is probably the future of computer science education, given how online education will completely eat brick and mortar education in utility as well as cost, and their ability to scale on a national level as opposite to a state level. For now, it looks like University of the People is the best candidate for razor-thin departmental offering, focusing exclusively on computer science (really the only STEM department that can be taught online). So it looks like University of the People is the winner of nonprofit online universities. Perhaps edX will step into the arena and offer a cheap B.S. in CS, but I'm not holding my breath.

Now when it comes to private for-profits that provide computer science education and also provide public library licenses, the candidates are Lynda, Treehouse, and Safari Books. In my opinion, all three of these services are awesome, and I don't feel a need to attempt to cut any particular one out of the running for our philanthropy, instead preferring to rank them according to utility so that funding can be provided one after the other. In my opinion, the ranking goes Treehouse, Lynda, Safari Books, just because Library Genesis provides such an important service that textbooks are the least necessary for CS students. I think using textbooks to learn CS is essential, so I'm not diminishing that, but with Library Genesis on the block, providing free textbooks to anyone savvy enough to use it instead of going broke buying $100 textbooks, and a possible Spotify for Books for $15 a month bound to be invented some day soon -- not to mention the possibility of a student just using free OER for their reading instead of non open source books -- the need to provide CS books in particular is small in this day and age. So if I were to fund CS education at my local public library, I would focus on funding Treehouse first, Lynda second, then Safari Books third.

So here are our current winners: University of the People, Treehouse, Lynda, and Safari Books. In my opinion these services are enough to enable anyone to become a competent enough developer to secure a first job, and then further allowing them to pursue a GATech OMSCS master's degree later so that they maximize their earning potential too. All of these services are affordable enough a hefty donation from a wealthy philanthropist should be able to fund their implementation at a public library in their hometown.

Let me explain what I'm thinking. Let's say someone donates $4 million dollars to establish an endowment for CS learning at their local public library. Assuming that money is investing in VTSAX/VFIAX, that money will provide a 4% withdrawal for the library. That's roughly $160,000 a year. That's a hefty sum, it could basically fund 160 people to study a B.S. in CS at the University of the People a year. Assuming the public library could fund the Lynda and Treehouse subscriptions, that's 160 [F-You Degree students](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree) a year. That's an amazing service for just $4 million in donations. Fund all the computer scientists in your hometown to get a free bachelor's degree in CS for the rest of eternity, for just $4 million up front. Why governments aren't establishing a University of the People scholarship at their local public libraries is a mystery to me, but I'm willing to let private donations fund it if governments won't do it. They make bank by having massive federal loans taken out by students in perpetuity, so the idea of a nation-wide network of free bachelor's degrees in computer science probably won't take any time soon. It's nearly sufficient that public libraries offer Treehouse and Lynda subscriptions, those are nearly the equivalent of a bachelor's degree if you 100% complete their curriculum mixed with some OER.

So if I were to fund the computer science department at my local public library, I would first ensure that the costs of Treehouse were covered with my endowment. That provides the most utility, considering how cheap it is ($300 a year) while providing everything you need to become a computer scientist. Next up would be Lynda, which is sort of moot since most public libraries offer Lynda anyway, so the endowment would rather promote the use of Lynda to learn computer science rather than fund it (I imagine Lynda is expensive). That leaves University of the People. My unfounded assumption is that Treehouse costs something like $30-50k a year for a library (I assume it scales according to number of accounts), so that leaves about $100k+ for University of the People scholarships. That's still a shitton of free F-You degrees, essentially equivalent to the number of graduates at a small public liberal arts college's CS department. For eternity. For free. The shockingly simple math behind the F-You Degree.

The idea of philanthropists funding free F-You Degrees for all the kids in their town that want to be computer scientists through the public library and a specific CS-only endowment is very realistic and not at all pipedreamish. It's the way things are trending anyway: My public library gives out free Treehouse subscriptions. I studied there at the same time I studied CS (only) at my local public university, and I wound up being job ready in just two years. The total cost was $8000. If I had done University of the People, it would have cost $4000. The public library saved me about $600 with my Treehouse subscription. Since Treehouse AND University of the People is too expensive for a public library, instead they'll have to rely on philanthropists establishing educational endowments. That's fine, especially when just $4 million should be enough to fund more than a 100 F-You Degrees a year. That's a great service to enable in your community, and I know it'll be my personal philanthropic goal to establish such a fund when I'm nearing death. In 50 years, public libraries will probably offer services so good at teaching computer science, no one will feel a need to go and pay for university. I already feel that now with Treehouse and Library Genesis. There's already zero need to go to university to study CS (unless you want a job in academia), so in 50 years it'll probably be even more truthful to an exponential degree. The future is bright for computer scientists, already they can enter the workforce for zero dollars but admittedly two to four years of hard work. More and more affordable CS curricula will be invented, both for-profit and nonprofit, and people will continue to unschool computer science and save enough money to fund early retirement thanks to putting that money in index funds at a young age. It's truly brilliant, and there's no reason to pay it forward as much as you can as a philanthropist and enable free CS education at your local public library. I am thankful for the free Treehouse subscription, and I hope many other people around the nation will get Treehouse at their public library as soon as possible. Philanthropists can accelerate the wait by establishing Treehouse endowments at their public library, and once they pay for Treehouse they can blow past that landmark and pay for UoPeople degrees. Once they pay for that they can blow past and pay for GATech OMSCS degrees. The sky's the limit with affordable online education! Philanthropists should jump into the foray and ensure that these critical services by the public library are funded for eternity. Small investments can do that. The only way people will start using their public libraries for college-equivalent educations is if those services are funded by local philanthropists aiming to improve their community. That is maximized by giving to public libraries to establish CS-specific education endowments, not just contributing to the local university when you die. The return on investment is immense. Instead of just reaching one or two kids, you can affect more than a hundred every year for eternity.

That's my own philanthropic goal. Saving money by skipping college and using the utilities your public library provides basically ensures a great educational experience, when mixed with OER and OCW, and lets you put money that would have been spent on college loans into index funds instead. It's a win-win situation: You become a computer scientist thanks to your public library, and you become financially independent thanks to your frugality matched with having a useful, employable, and high earning skill like programming. Anyone who thinks the answer to high costs of college is to give colleges more money philanthropically is high on their own supply. The answer is the public library, who has a mission of completely free education. Colleges are businesses out to make as much money as possible, and as a result will always be looking out for themselves instead of the students. People go into academia to earn high salaries and cushy tenured positions. Librarians aren't looking out for their bottom line, usually, nor are public libraries attempting to line their own pockets on the public's back. Philanthropy should go towards philanthropic services, not businesses. Just because a college is legally a nonprofit doesn't make it so. Anyone who doesn't realize a college is an income-generating business (for governments as well as private individuals) needs to read more about the student debt crisis.

The idea that I could fund the future education of Topeka's youth when I'm 80 or whatever is quite fun. Online education will continue to get cheaper, so public libraries will continue to offer more and more services related to computer science education. Public universities will get into the race to create affordable online education curricula, just like GATech has done with their OMSCS Master's degree and UoPeople has done with their OER-based B.S. In fifty years, all the money I saved towards this philanthropy will be moot because B.S.es in CS will probably already be paid for by your public library. That's the way things are heading. It's already true that a college is dilapidated thanks to Library Genesis and OCW. This will continue to be the case as private companies provide similar services at $15 a month rates. This kind of growth is only in the computer sciences, because CS invented open source licensing and CS invented the internet. CS has to improve its free education offerings, because CS educations are growing increasingly important as more and more jobs requiring programming skills. CS education isn't a industry where you make a lot of money, instead it is an industry that has some of the highest impact on communities around the nation. In exchange for affordability and smaller profits, online education services are instead enabling more and more people to FIRE and retire early. It's remarkable what cheap but good education can enable when you're not saddled with a hundred thousand dollars of debt at age 22. Being able to max out your 401k and IRA at 22 is instead what creates wealth in communities, and I hope computer scientists will be able to enable through philanthropy future generations of kids to become computer scientists for free thanks to their public library. Computer Scientists + Public Libraries (+ Open Source) is an explosive combination. Unfortunately the dominance of colleges in the public sphere of education is ending thanks to systemic abuse and exploitation almost by necessity. Many kids don't realize that a liberal arts degree is a waste of time and money. STEM degrees are the only proper pursuit for the money, yet we're facing the fact that computer science degrees have been "moved to the cloud," so to speak. Online education is almost better than in-person CS education. You're already on a computer to type in code, so why not just learn to code through that same computer? It's a self-reinforcing circle, and to ignore that benefit is to pay money unnecessarily into an antiquated system. Computers have never been known for having much tolerance for antiquated equipment, and so it's no surprise that online innovations have exceeded the offerings of traditional schools in just the decade since the invention of YouTube. It's computer-led because it's computer-led. Bricks and mortar colleges collapse under their own bloat, their last refuge of competitivity comes from the lingering social superstition towards the value of "prestige" and "degrees". Pretty quaint for a hundred thousand dollars at age 22.

Unfortunately I'm writing about my timetable, and instead of being soon, the timeframe is roughly half a decade. But I'm writing about it in hopes that other people can see what my opinion of where my philanthropic goals are focused on, so that they too can see what they can do to facilitate ubiquitous free F-You Degrees in their hometown. Let's see what innovations we can implement in order to improve society. I'm optimistic!






























