---
date: "2019-05-11"
title: "100 Reasons Not To Go To College to Study Computer Science"
ghissue: 67
---

I am writing a new series on this blog called "100 Reasons Not to Go to College to Study Computer Science." Please note that, if you read all the articles on this website, you will notice that I am a proponent of going to college to study computer science-- as long as that college is in your hometown so you can live at home when you go to school, and it is a public school. My guess is, if you are smart enough to be a programmer, you are smart enough to get a scholarship at a public school. Maybe not a full ride (though National Merit Scholarship all but assures you of a full ride at an in-state public school), but at least enough to keep costs low. I think if you are in high school the smartest thing you can do is study SAT prep on Khan Academy or through books from Library Genesis, matched with vocabulary lists downloaded and studied for free on Anki. The small amount of preparation it takes in order to score well on the SAT/ACT/PSAT is worth its weight in gold when you land a scholarship as a result of studying for them. That was what I chose to do in High School. I took the PSAT in seventh grade, and as a result of scoring well was enrolled in the TIP program at Duke. My best friend and I were able to go to a summer computer camp at Oglethorpe University in Atlanta, GA where I studied BASIC. I had already taught myself BASIC in sixth grade and HTML in seventh, so this was an opportunity to take a few weeks and really spend time on programming tutorials and hone my skills. It was at that summer camp that I decided I wanted to be a computer programmer when I grew up because of how impressed I was by the camp counselors. I had wanted to be a scientist since first grade, but that was when I knew computers would play a big role.

So in high school, instead of working for $6.50 an hour I took every single AP class offered by my school. By the time I graduated I had taken every single AP class offered except Calc BC (because it conflicted with AP Art History) and the second semester of AP Statistics. This paid for itself much more than working a high school job. For a $150 test at the end of the year, you earned a semesters worth of college credit. Not even University of the People is $150 for a semester class. This credit was accepted at every college, whether a community college or the Ivy League. The additional benefit of taking AP classes was that the GPA was weighted, so an A was worth a 5.0. I started taking AP classes my sophomore year of high school. By the time I applied for colleges, I was first in my class. Not only was I receiving college credit for $150 (and free textbooks provided by the high school, I might add), I had also helped my ranking immensely. Because I was first in my class, I was accepted into the schools I wanted to go to (Reed and the University of Chicago) and received a full ride from my state school, KU. I chose the college that gave me the largest scholarship, Reed, in which I earned the Presidential Scholarship which converted all my non-Pell loan amounts into grant dollars. Reed College ended up costing roughly $15,000 a year, still a hefty sum but in essence I had earned a scholarship worth $72,000. Earning $72,000 as a high schooler is a good advance, and I don't regret not having worked in high school when I came out of high school a hardened scientist, knowledgable in STEM and mathematics as well as the humanities. All I'm saying is that, if you work hard as a high schooler, you can earn a healthy income even if you don't work at a minimum wage job. Trust me that, you guessed it, studying STEM is the best use of your time and every hour and opportunity you have during the day to study STEM should be dedicated to that task, and that there are many opportunities even in high school to earn an income as a scientist just through potential scholarships as a result of ranking well in your high school class. I also prepared for the SAT and ACT very hard, studying my vocabulary flashcards and math. Those also helped me earn scholarships at the schools I applied. Not only was I prepared to do well as a STEM student at college, but I was able to go to an expensive out of state private school for the equivalent cost of a state university. I made the opportunity cost of not working a minimum wage job as a high schooler (so I wasn't able to buy fancy shit or whatever high schoolers with minimum wage jobs buy), but it paid for itself through AP credit and scholarships. Again, don't view high school as a waste of time and a barrier if you want to be a computer scientist. Instead you should see it as a factory that will pay you handsomely if you do nothing other than follow your dream of wanting to be a scientist. If you work hard at the sciences and don't piddle away your time for $6.50 an hour, you'll find yourself with a full ride to a state university at the end of high school (especially if you are a National Merit Scholar). As soon as I graduated from high school I worked during the summer as a lifeguard (so that I could afford to buy a new Apple computer when I went off to school -- which was a mistake. I should have invested the money in a Vanguard IRA and used an old free computer running linux. C'est la vie...).

Frugality is a mixed bag. Sometimes strategically not working can essentially earn you more money. You have to know what is expected and what the possibilities of education are. Sometimes it makes more sense to go to college, and sometimes it makes more sense to work a job. You basically have to learn to gauge the weather forecast in this way by reading books about universities. I am at the stage in life where pursuing a PhD in CS would hinder my earnings, so there is no need to enroll at a university when my life will be more fulfilling by working. In high school it made more sense to study science than to work, and as a result I earned scholarships worth tens of thousands of dollars because I used my precious time to study STEM. I had an advantage, just because I scored well on the PSAT in middle school, I was able to study with camp counselors at a university. I was acquiring the knowledge of what was required and expected to be a computer scientist at the age of 12. As a result, I went home and kept studying HTML and made myself a decently popular web page my eighth grade year. My best friend studied Java and started programming and modding LucasArts video games (my best friend now has a PhD in astronomy and is an engineer at Raytheon). We went to college in seventh grade and as a result knew what we had to do in high school in order to afford and succeed at college. We were very lucky and I'm still counting my blessings I went to that computer camp. Sometimes being a scientist can be a little bit lonesome, especially when you have to study math or chemistry in your room at night when it seems other people are working at jobs that afford them cars and such or else partying, but STEM is ultimately the right choice of profession if you are capable of doing it and have an interest. The pay is good and I'll tell you-- after obtaining a liberal arts degree-- the university experience is much more practical. Few things are more awesome than being a scientist, and after experiencing what working in the humanities was like, I will never do anything that isn't STEM. Hard work is rewarded in the sciences, whereas hard work means nothing in the humanities (it is all an issue of politics/are-you-committed-to-social-justice-and-socialism-as-much-as-your-boss instead). It's funny, but if you are interested in and committed to the Enlightenment, your time is better spent in the science department than the humanities department. Enlightenment thought is beloved by scientists, whereas mention the Enlightenment in the humanities and you'll be lectured about how the left has many "very good" critiques of liberal democracy. Sure... sure... let me get right on that...

So I am of course beleaguered to start a series on this blog called "100 Reasons Not to Go To College to Study Computer Science." College can be great-- if you earned a full ride scholarship. But sometimes that doesn't happen. Sometimes you had to work that minimum wage job as a high schooler, and as a result your grades suffered. Sometimes you weren't sure what you wanted to do when you grew up, so you didn't prep yourself out with STEM AP classes. Unfortunately colleges basically prey on these types of people, quite unfairly I might add. Just because you didn't walk in through the hollowed gates a professional scientist, you are basically exploited in a way that can cause a lifetime of misery. I think private colleges cost something like $60,000 a year nowadays (that's how much RPI cost when I worked there). This is seriously dangerous. Colleges know that employers expect a college degree, and as a result they are willing to charge young adults $5000 a month just to be a student. There are few things worth $5000 a month, especially when you've never worked a professional job (something that _pays_ $5000 a month). It is in that spirit that I present the blog series. I think technology has essentially answered the question of whether a computer science degree is worth paying for if you didn't earn a full ride scholarship. And I believe that answer to be "no". College is a great experience, and it's a complete shame that it costs so much, especially when our parent's generation got to experience it at affordable rates. It's so funny that "non-profits" are some of the greatest exploitators of young people of our time. If I were able to charge $60,000 a year in order to get an 18 year old to read 2,000 pages of text and write a few cursory programs, I'd be a capitalist genius. Let alone call myself a "non-profit". What an irony one of the greatest expenses every incurred by a person, one that causes immensely painful and burdensome debt, is done by an entity called a non-profit.

Here's a non-profit for you: Open Source Educational Technology. Try a year of that for free and tell me what you can do and earn for your efforts versus paying $60,000 to a "non-profit". You know, as someone that survived a humanities degree, I think it's ironic that something that positions itself as "socialist" causes some of the largest debt to children in the entire history of the world. The humanities department are filled with trust-fund socialists, but they work at a "non-profit" that milks hundreds of thousands of dollars from 20 year olds. That is just one of the reasons I despise socialism, because socialists are some of the greediest people I have ever met. They thrive at greedy institutions. They'll plaster "non-profit" and "brotherhood" on their advertisements and brochures, because they're oh-so-philanthropic, you know, but all the while stabbing you in the back and stealing your purse (and future) while churning out passive aggressive book after passive aggressive book about how the free markets are evil, the Enlightenment was worse than Hitler, and big-S Science is patriarchal and colonial. Shove it up your ass, universities. You exist as social welfare for druggies that "write well", all while causing nothing but cause irreversible monetary pain to naive, optimistic, but innocent high schooler students. I'm not against free thought and diversity of opinions, but charging $60,000 a year for what amounts to socialist brainwashing akin to The Peoples Temple and Jonestown is absurd. This shit has to end and that's why I put my trust in open source educational technology as the future of computer science education and training rather than universities. I'm writing a blog and creating github repositories in order to promote OER as a vehicle of becoming a programmer outside of the bounds of university. I'm not a right-winger, I'm a secular humanist, and for some reason universities are viewed as the hotbed of secular humanism. I knew I thought I was walking into secular humanism studying the _humanities_ at college, but the experience was quite the opposite of humanism. I instead find humanism in open source educational technology, a vehicle for humanism that charges nothing for its consumption. I admit I was naive going into the humanities department thinking I would come out an Enlightenment Philosophe-- I did, afterall, get a taste of what passes as "the postmodern" in the championship debate circuit and its obsession with Foucault-- but is UNIVERSITY not seen as the centerpiece and focal point of secular humanism? It's almost predatory lending to charge tens of thousands of dollars a year in order to study _humanism_ in a _humanities_ department, only to find yourself at the whim of anti-Enlightenment postmodern socialists who now control your career and future, willing to wreck your reputation if you don't agree whole-heartedly with Foucault and Lacan, and transferring would cause immense burden and stigma as well as lost friends. Trying to navigate the humanities as a humanist is like being being a vegan forced to work as a line worker in an abattoir. Sure, you can do it and get a degree, but the process is soul-sucking and sure as hell not worth the pittance of a paycheck after being forced to do eight hours a day of something with which you ethically disagree. The deep level of confusion, anger, and feeling of exploitation is something truly desiccating and something you never truly quite get over, even when the student loans are finally paid off and the monthly calls for donations have been digitally blocked. All in the name of a "non-profit". I believe universities should rename their humanities department into the "socialist department." If there's not an ounce of humanism in the humanities department, centuries of effort thrown to waste by the siren call of postmodernism, then they should just stop with the false advertising and be forthright with it. The fact that they never would create the "socialism department" because socialism is stupid and rightly detested by Americans doesn't give them any pause with regard with what to do with their humanities departments becoming socialist thinktanks. But I think it would be honest and possibly prevent unaware teenagers from enrolling in dogmatic curriculum and degrees, wrongfully thinking it was an education in humanism. I also wouldn't mind a renaming of "non-profit" into "for-profit non-profit", since that's what it is.

So I propose, simply, that college should be skipped. If you aren't suffering in a liberal arts department, your friend probably is. I personally think the liberal arts should be jettisoned from universities (if you want to read the classics and Great Books you can read them free on Project Gutenberg) and it should instead just be STEM. But until that happens, and the humanities are still beating the dead horse that is socialism and anarchism, I propose finding a way to "hack" your own DIY computer science education on the internet. I think you'll find that, if you work hard, you can become a competant enough programmer to land a first job, at which point your job will probably pay for tuition reimbursement if you want to get a degree anyway or you can work/study your way into a new job that does. You learn the most important stuff regarding programming on-the-job anyway, there is little in university that prepares you for actual computer science work. The real computer science education comes from the job. People forget this, or don't learn this, and fetishize university as the only source of computer science knowledge. Fortunately that isn't the case. Otherwise we would all be beholden to tens of thousands of dollars of debt just to be able to work. Fortunately most of what is required to land a first programming job can be learned in about two years of hard work. Everything after that can be learned on-the-job, while you're earning a paycheck and maxing out your 401(k) and IRA each year while you're young for that fat compound interest.

So come explore with me: 100 Reasons Not To Go To College to Study Computer Science. If you're smart enough to program, you should have the confidence that you're smart enough to educate yourself in computer science, debt-free.
