---
date: "2019-08-16"
title: "One Year Anniversary!"
ghissue: 98
---

Holm School is officially one year old! I'd like to reflect on what I've accomplished, and what I haven't accomplished.

When I was a freshman, my best friend introduced me to a game called "Asheron's Call." I had been exploring multiplayer online games for about a year at that point (this was 1999), and it was immediately very intriguing as an apparatus. AC let you create a character in a 3D role playing world on a map that was huge, and within the huge map (it could probably take 24 hours to run from one edge of the map of the "Dereth" island to the other) there were hundreds if not thousands of small enclosed "dungeons" underground and accessed through portals on the surface. You obviously earned xp as you killed creatures along the way, but you also could quest and earn rare weapons and armor. I was familiar with questing as a game dynamics through playing Viking MUD (also with my best friends), but this was especially exciting because these dungeons often had some of the most immersive architecture I had ever experienced. I am an architecture buff and dungeons were just massive architectural gems. And the houses and building on the surface, which you could explore and were populated by art and had different "ethnic" styles behind them (Japanese Asian, Muslim African, and Renaissance British) were so fun to explore I, and many others, simply explored the topography rather than hunting just to find what different towns looked like architecturally. I know I became an art history major in college because I loved the architecture and art (actually paintings in the game) that reflected the different ethnicities. I focused on Chinese art in college because Japanese art wasn't offered at my school and I loved the Sho cities, with their pagodas, in the game.

Part of the fun of Asheron's Call, which continued to tradition of MUDs which had guilds, was the allegiance system. You could swear to a patron and become their vassals. Monarchies were established by the people at the top of the pyramid, with everyone reporting underneath them having the monarch's name in their "identity"/profile when people examined them. While the most notorious monarchy was "Blood" on the PK server Darktide, I played on a carebear server called "Frostfell." After having a few patrons (my best friend's brother), I decided to reroll and start a new character that would be a [vagabond](https://asheron.fandom.com/wiki/Vagabond) (vagabond was a pre-set character template, and notoriously the weakest preset character template in the game... it was sort of a joke to be a vagabond) and would start a monarchy of vagabonds. Vagabonds used the dagger, a weapon at that point in the game which was viewed as heavily "underpowered." But underpowered meant nothing to me, because I was a roll-player in-game. That meant I didn't spend much attention to level or power, but had fun trying to make new friends while keeping "in character" based on my view of how I should behave given my character's ethnicity, backstory, and role as a vagabond.

Vagabonds were thieves. They were trained in lockpicking and deception, which were utterly useless skills in the game, but they had a compelling backstory. This was the same time Napster came out, and I was obsessed with collecting rare Weezer b-sides on Napster and spent a large amount of time on my 56K modem downloading mp3s. Vagabonds were interesting to me because I too had basically became a contemporary theif in my culture, but I was compelled by the benefits of Napster rather than racked with guilt, particularly. Our vagabond guild in game never became a big guild, I think at most we had about 8 people (roughly the amount of visitors we get to Holm School a week), but I still remember some of the vassals names: Astaldo, Backstabby McStabby. We roleplayed as thieves in game. One of my vassals actually stole a rare Gertarh's Dagger from my in-game friend Tepper the Brutal and then disappeared, forever stealing away a rare dagger from Tepper. There wasn't an in-game mechanic from stealing, no no no, it was literally trying to convince another character to loan you their dagger and then never returning it. Of course, we were preset character templates of Vagabonds (which you could see if you identified us in our profile), so you had to know what you were getting into when you encountered one of us. No one played a vagabond for real, it was such a "joke" of a template. No, you had to know what you were getting into. Backstabby McStabby actually stole from a friend of the guild (Tepper). But what could you expect from a character named "Backstabby McStabby"? While Tepper was sad, we all just had to laugh a bit too.

The best aspect of Asheron's Call was the lore. The lore wasn't just a blip you read before playing the game on a website or something. Instead, a giant book came with the game, that included all the backstory of the three ethnicities in the game and a beautiful "Medieval" hand-drawn perspectival map of the various important cities in game. The ethnicities were the driving point of the game, in that all art was one of the three ethnicities, and players were actually encouraged to create named that were in the style of the three ethnicities (i.e. an Asian sounding name for the Sho, a Muslim sounding name for Gharundim, and a British sounding name for Aluvians). Then they wanted to role-play those ethnicities. While that might sound weird in this hyper PC world we live in, to me it was like enrolling in a Humanities 110 course as a freshman in high school. There were actually public libraries in the game, one in each of the capitals of the three ethnicities. Each public library contained a translator (you would give indecipherable texts to the translator, they would translate it, then give you back a readable text of in-game lore) as well as a book shelve of important lore books, and then a few tomes on pedestals which you could walk around inside the library and read (they were roughly 20 pages each). So you could learn about the history of the three ethnicities, and their role in the world they lived in before they were "teleported" to Dereth. Obviously armor and weapons were ethnic too, with armor being styled either as Asian, Muslim, or British and each ethnicity having a default automatically trained skill in either Unarmed Weapons (Asian), Staff (Muslim), or Dagger (British). Everything in this game was touched by three separate history of three different races. It was marvelous.

I realized I played the game to learn about lore. Lore wasn't static, each month the new quests that were released in the world usually contained some sort of text at the end of the quest (along with the quest armor or weapon) that could be kept in your backpack as a personal library. I actually roleplayed a librarian, and hung out in the public library at Hebian-To. I just talked to people in the public library. I tried to accumulate as many lore texts as I could (you could also purchase books and scrolls and parchments to store your own writings, so that you could write books and lore yourself and distribute it). I participated in lore competition, in which participants gathered in a town hall in a particular city and tried to answer Asheron's Call lore trivia. I loved the storyline of this game. Because it was so real, i.e. based on actual ethnicities and not something nonconcrete like "goblin" or "elf" or such, I obviously became an art history major in college because I loved learning about various culture's art.

So while aesthetics and books were an important part of my playing of the game for the two years I did, I realize that Holm School is basically my attempt at reviving my vagabond guild for a more modern time, in which the "questing" isn't killing a series of creatures in a dungeon, but a quest to learn to program. The "reward" is obviously the gold/loot you receive in compensation for working as a programmer in a developer job. Questing is still a game, I still hope to gamify studying CS through Holm School, but the loot isn't an icon or a trophy or a badge but the literal monetary reward you earn when working at your first job, and the concomitant career that follows.

But like Asheron's Call, along with that reward comes some lore. The lore, just as in the case of Asheron's Call, are books you can read and collect at the end of your quest. Since books build off one another, you start out on the newb quest and keep questing/studying until you earn the "lore" of a computer science text that grows in difficulty, yet you eventually master through the "grind" of studying. Or through the questing that is associate with another aspect of Holm Schooling, whether that's going vegan straightedge to save money or [building your 'stash and frugality muscles](https://mrmoneymustache.com) or else starting up your Vanguard accounts in preparation for your first job, when you further "quest" to start saving 50%+ each year of your income in them. Complete a quest, earn a free book at the end. Buy a raspberry pi, earn a free book. Install all the necessary dev software in Raspbian, earn a free book. Study Khan Academy, earn a free book. That's lore for your lore needs. We're Holm Schoolers (vagabonds) interested in becoming computer scientists for as little money as possible. Soon there's a positive feedback loop that develops when your "quest" is to read a computer science textbook, and the reward at the end is a new computer science book, slightly more difficult than the last. That's free college right there, and that's what Library Genesis affords you until a Spotify-for-Books is invented. Questing takes a multitude of roles in Holm School, but we're all still roleplaying as vagabonds interested in hanging out a public libraries, catching up on lore, and making friends (and enemies through our thefts). Power and prestige and level doesn't matter, we're in the Holm School guild for the fun of the game and to roleplay who we want to be.

Of course, part of vagabonding isn't just the "bonding" part. It's partly being a deliberate thief, with our specialized lockpick and deception skill. We rob other players in our game. Our theft of loot and armor is through the use of Library Genesis to obtain our books. Just like we pay $10 a month to play the MMORPG (representing our dedication to actually paying $10 a month once a Spotify for Books comes out, which we will quickly subscribe to), we pay for our internet bill in order to role play stealing from authors and publishers in the game. While people will pay large amounts of money (the equivalence of hunting time for in-game loot which you can sell for money to purchase and trade), we use social engineering to get our weapons and armor for free at the hands of an unwilling victim. But that's part of the game, where vagabonds are an original template pre-made by the game creators and labelled accordingly for all to see. Vagabonds are backstabbers and vagrants, motivated by greed and probably a few bad temperament genes. We rob from the rich, and spend our time planning heists. That's just part of the game, in this digital-heavy MMORPG we call America in 2019. When you wrote your book in a digital Word program, you signed up to play the MMORPG called "the internet," with its multitude of vagabonds. Fortunately, just like digital weapons are valueless in real life, the actual harm of ripping a digital copy of a book has a cost of zero dollars. There is no actual loss of real money. But the internet giveth, and the internet taketh away.

Holm School is my vagabond guild. Talking openly about Library Genesis is a bit of a faux pas in proper society. But as people trained in lockpick (Napster), we break into rich people's safes and treasure chests and locked doors and steal their gems and jewelry. Or in this case, ebooks. It's all just a game, and we're questing in our goal of becoming legendary characters in the in-game lore that is taking place as we all play it. The goal isn't to become legendary through prestige, power, level, and self-interest, but to imprint our memory in players based on our dedication to remaining in-character (whether that's hanging out in the tavern for a few drinks at the end of hunting time or else being a useful and friendly librarian in the capital's public library) and contributing to the amount of fun people have (and nothing is more fun than bootstrapping a CS career for free). Sure, we're vagabonds -- we're specialized in Library Genesis, but beneath it all we're quite a lovable if needling guild.

I wish I had senior thesis'd on Asheron's Call in-game lore and art. Instead I thesis'd on what it meant to be an art history professor sociologically. That was good preparation which led me down the path to realize I never wanted to be a college professor in the liberal arts, due to adjunct hell and the student debt crisis, but part of my exploration in my thesis was how to promote Art history to young people. That's why I still create art history curricula in my [github repos](https://github.com/HolmSchool/lloyd-reynolds-selected-bibliography-for-art-history) as well as [history/hum110 curricula](https://github.com/HolmSchool/reed-college-humanities-hum110-curriculum). Lore is valuable whereever it is found to those interested in roleplaying a historian, translator, or professor. Part of developing interest in your field in young people is realizing the massive opportunity young people have. Instead of being forced to study in the wee hours of the night after an exhausting 9 hours of labor at your day job (in which you don't want to study but just relax a bit), when you're young you have the opportunity to read book after book during the key earning morning and afternoon hours with no obligation to earn a salary because you're still living at home for a few more years. Learning computer science when you're young is the best roleplaying experience ever, it creates the most powerful templates imaginable. Becoming financially independent is like "beating" the game, it is quite an accomplishment and something obtainable if a young person teaches themselves FIRE principles along with their computer science training.

When I was 18, I signed up for $60,000 in tuition in an attempt to discover what I loved about Asheron's Call. What I discovered was that lore should cost roughly $10 a month, or the same price I paid for my AC subscription. You should pay no more for college than what an MMORPG costs. (and, take my advice, don't play MMORPGs or any video games either for that matter, they're addictive and expensive and create bad habits and autistic-like social development. READ instead, it's infinitely more fun and rewarding and books are free at your public library or on Library Genesis). I basically signed up for the "grind" instead of just enjoying what role playing affords you. In Asheron's Call there were hundreds of newbie dungeons and quests for low level players. It didn't matter what level you were, a couple of months worth of effort opened up hundreds of beautifully created dungeons architecturally and artistically with lore embedded within them, and for any deficiency in power you could just get a big old party of your friends, which would usually suffice for fire-power. What was most fun, I discovered in Asheron's Call, was visiting as many newbie dungeons as possible just to explore the architecture and art. I wasn't interested in power leveling, I was interested in lore and expanding my aesthetic horizons. As soon as the aesthetic experience became redudant and no longer novel, I quit playing Asheron's Call (and started going to museums in real life as my hobby/"quest"). My mistake was to enroll in private university, which was basically the equivalent of power-levelling and becoming concerned about status instead of enjoying the aesthetics and roleplaying opportunity of the game. I never should have left my hometown, I should have lived at home and "bloomed where I was planted" and through my frugality and cunningness initiated my career in my hometown, where my friends and family were, instead of thinking I needed to move to a city after college or whatnot to have a "real" career which was a better use of my time. I lost the aesthetic experience of learning and finding lore and just became interested in the stats of my character and his loot and wealth. In my opinion, I shouldn't have paid more for college than I was paying for Asheron's Call.

As a computer scientist, you can learn a college equivalent curriculum for $10 a month. You can develop yourself as a scientist just by roleplaying a frugal vagabond in a guild called Holm School, or another equivalent github OER/OCW/OpenEd project. As the video game winds down and it's time to get a job, you'll find that you're left with many friends (who aren't in your digital guild, persay, but in your actual hometown) and many new career paths. You won't be in such a massive amount of debt that the only solution is to obtain a prestigious job in a big city. You don't need to powerlevel, you just need to stay in-character as a computer science vagabond in your hometown guild and never go "/ooc" and take out student loans or move away at the age of just 18. You can quest and find the history of computer science a compelling narrative, one that you want to be a virtual librarian of, and you can collect lore tomes in your digital "rucksack" that is your ipad or tablet. All for $10 a month, or the price of Asheron's Call. That's what the Holm School guild is all about, and that's why I'm your monarch. It's about improving yourself through simple quests that in time create the sort of character you want to become as you leave the "game" of school and start living as an adult (who doesn't play video games, obviously, since you're so well developed as a person). You can leave your vagabond guild behind and just become a scientist (no one needs to know).

I want to become as enthralled with computer science as I was enthralled with art history thanks to a video game. I think, just like MMORPG (at least back in the day) facilitated role playing, OER/OCW facilitates role playing too. They let your imagination grow wild with little upfront cost. They let you ignore the noise of competition and instead focus on your character. They teach you charity and philanthropy and how some things are done just for fun, not for any rational reason (nothing is more irrational in this day and age than open sourcing your book or class). They let you remain in character and not have to worry about the "level" of SAT/ACT scores or the "damage modifier" of your college's rankings in US World and News Report. They just let you have some fun, which is apparently ignored in the day and age of non-bankruptable student tuition costs of more than a hundred thousand dollars for four years of reading some books and taking some tests (which you can do online or at your public library for free). OER/OCW is vagabonding in action, in which you deliberately choose the most "gimped" template just because you see the role playing potential. You might steal from a few people along the way. You might make enemies based on your character, but you might make some real friends who truly love vagabonds for all they're gimped selves are worth.

Thanks for role playing with me. I hope I'm a good monarch here at the Holm School guild.
