---
date: "2019-06-19"
title: "Don't Lock Yourself Into Proprietary Licenses by Using Non-Open Source Textbooks"
ghissue: 87
---

I look at paid books the same way I look at non-open source programs: I'm pretty skeptical after years of horrible return on investments with them.

For example, in college I studied Max/MSP for my studio art classes while completing my art degree, but after graduating in 2008 during the recession I quickly discovered that I couldn't even budget enough to afford to buy myself a copy of the software. I had spent years learning to program in this language, only to find in the "real world" outside of life as a student I couldn't even use it! I sort of laugh about it now, comparing it to learning a programming language that has a $500 licensing fee to use. Why would I ever use a programming language that is proprietary? Yet there I was, in debt from a liberal arts degree smack in the middle of the great recession and not even able to afford to purchase the software I had spent years learning in hopes of having a career creating music with it. It was sort of a learning lesson: Never use non-open source software in your creation pipeline. People are all too willing to slap a gigantic licensing fee that simply exceeds the return on investment that people usually earn by using the software itself. The music I made using Max/MSP basically earned me nothing, yet I was expected to pay for $500 software with updates that cost hundreds of dollars and the entire ecosystem was proprietary. It's kind of like professional sports: There are very few people who can use proprietary software, which costs hundreds of dollars if not thousands, and make money with it. The odds of doing something in the art fields with proprietary software and making money from it are about the same odds as becoming a professional sports player. It's just horrible odds.

I now look at books in much the same way, realizing that throughout college the pattern seemed to be to buy these really expensive books (and I was fortunate as a liberal arts major, since I didn't buy textbooks but rather classics from penguin or oxford world classics, which are much cheaper) and use up all my money, so that when I later went to purchase a book for my own personal pleasure I usually overdrafted my debit card (this was before the days of cell phone bank statements). I have spent so many thousands of dollars on books over my lifetime, almost to the point that I found myself with student loans after college yet no money to buy the books that I needed to own in order to do my academic research I hoped to sell. Just like with Max/MSP, I had locked myself into an ecosystem that was only profitable to a few elite players, and otherwise was a money sink to anyone else. Buying books took a majority of my money, and the only alternative was to go to grad school in order to have access to their stacks. Books are basically proprietary software, and the upfront cost of them coupled with their closed copyright, makes them limited in your ability to earn money using them.

I now realize I have been wasting my times pursuing books, because they have never been open source. Whereas most classics are public domain, so that I could take my humanities courses much more affordably than other "core major" classes, college textbooks are a tremendous waste of time pursuing. If you think you can make money using the "software" (books) in your academic discipline, why is that software not open source? Why are books not copyleft? Unfortunately I've come to the conclusion that the more proprietary your books are in your academic major, i.e. if you rely on expensive textbooks and books, the less likely it is that you can make money with the knowledge in those books. That is to say, if you aren't on a open source-only diet when it comes to reading books, you probably are isolating yourself into a proprietary walled garden that doesn't let you earn money by remixing their content. Much like the time I spent learning a non-open source programming language, studying non-open source textbooks is kind of like making your future self require licensing fees just to have the possibility to make money. Non open source books are mostly a scam.

I have little compassion for colleges due to their reliance on textbooks that cost $200. For my intro to programming course, I laughed at the idea of paying $150 for a copy of the latest iteration of the book when I had already taught myself programming, as a seventh grader, for free online. I knew that there was little need for going into debt to such a degree as $150 _for a BOOK_ when the internet and public library was there for me. To think that a single textbook could basically pay for an entire year of PluralSight, which is expensive in its own right, is remarkable. So I instead bought the older version of the textbook for $15 used, and it contains nearly all the same information except for a single chapter on JavaFX (which I read from a friend, otherwise I programmed in Swing).

But now I look back and I truly question why a beginning programming textbook at that college wasn't free. Fortunately my other alma mater, Reed College, decided to use an open source textbook for their intro to programming class. The way I think of it, if a private school can use open source textbooks, there's no reason a local public university should require a $150 textbook purchase. That type of money for a BOOK is rediculous, especially considering the tremendous number of free open source programming textbooks professors could potentially use. To expect students to pay $150 just to learn if statements and stuff is reprehensible. In a way, it just shows how silly it is to attend college, when there are so many open source educational resources. Why would a book cost $150? No information, especially computer science information, is worth that amount. Yet here we were, a college class with thirty students each buying a copy of the textbook. I was the only person to use the $15 older edition.

To require students to spend $150 on a book just shows the absurdity of colleges nowadays. If there is anything that is unsustainable, it is an attempt to negate the momentum that open source has and bury your head in the sand and keep requiring purchase of "software" with a proprietary license. Just like I couldn't afford Max/MSP, I couldn't afford going back to college to study computer science. The costs were simply too astronomical. I realized that the only option I had was to study open source edtech, but I quickly realized that it was actually a better learning experience. I was learning marketable skills that I wouldn't have learned in the university, all for free in a way that allowed me to keep studying far past the limitations of a single class' homework. I knew that I was enabling myself to be a computer scientist in perpetuity, rather than having my career "blockaded" when I couldn't afford the proprietary software license and its required yearly upgrades. Instead of programming in a closed source ecosystem, I was using open source to earn money rather than hemorrhaging it. To invest your time in anything other than open source educational technology is a truly dangerous endeavor, one that risks an end result of absolutely zero return on investment.

That's why I'm not sorry to see websites like Library Genesis take a stab at an industry ripe for disruption, the same way the music industry was with Napster. To think of all the times I overdrafted buying an expensive book for a college class literally makes me hate the publishing industry. When I see Amazon develop a kindle ebook delivery system but only charge a few dollars less than the deadwood edition when it should cost just a dollar or two total, I realize what a scam the proprietary-license book industry is. To think that they will receive an industry-wide disruption thanks to Library Genesis is sort of schadenfreude inducing. I think they've made themselves rich off non-bankruptable student loans, and we're facing the cost as an entire nation when a whole generation of kids have trillions of dollars of loans.

So I wonder what I can do to promote the OER industry in computer science (and other academic departments). I hope for a future that publishing a book without an open source license is as absurd as developing non-open source software today. Open source is a great system that truly utilizes the free markets to maximize human pleasure and profit, so the more it sinks into other industries than programming, the better. The future world of free books will be a welcome development rather than the previous world of overdrafts and debt due to having to buy required textbooks.

I propose you follow a pledge just like I do: when it comes to acquiring new programming skills, prioritize open source educational resources as your first line of research. Only use proprietary EdTech, like Treehouse, PluralSight, and Lynda, when you find it necessary. Otherwise use OER and your public library (including Library Genesis) to accomplish your educational goals. You'll find without the debt and the sealing yourself off from future use due to enormous licensing fees, you'll be able to develop more open source software because you yourself won't have to rely on proprietary licenses to recuperate your losses from spending a lot of money. Open source propagates open source, just like frugality propagates financial independence. If you avoid proprietary ecosystems including non-free books and stick with OER, you'll be set for life at making a profit at no cost to you.

Don't use non-open source programming languages, whether that takes the form of software or actual paper books!
