---
date: "2018-10-18"
title: "What it Means to Pay for College in Cash"
---

I have a hypothesis: College is only worth paying for in cash. That is to say, never take out a loan to pay for college. Especially for a computer science degree. You can enforce this in a number of ways: Self-study for free through the internet using the open education resources listed on the [curriculum](/curriculum) page, or otherwise going to community college to study computer science/programming (and not taking other classes in other departments). You could also enroll at University of the People and pay for college in cash by working five hours per week and living at home for four years while you complete the degree. Ditto for the community college option, if one is located in your hometown. Stay frugal and pay in cash.

This is partly a critique of student loan debt crisis. No college is worth going into debt for, because college isn't that important of a process anymore. Considering you are working on a computer anyway while learning to code, it would make sense to just open up free OER resources on the same computer and study that way, instead of paying for expensive lectures. Equivalent lectures have also been recorded and uploaded to YouTube in the form of Open Courseware. You can completely self study now a degree in computer science (especially if you include resources offered by your public library), there is no reason to pay for it. The secret is: You don't learn anything that you couldn't learn through self-study in the classroom. If you commit yourself to reading the same books, watching equivalent opencourseware lectures, then you'll be sure to come out with an equivalent education for free. If you are concerned about not having a degree, you can get one for $4000 through University of the People. Supplement UofPeople with extensive self-study and as long as you work your butt off every day for four years, you'll wind up with the same education. Coding isn't something that requires a classroom to learn. At a minimum, you could probably learn to code just through YouTube. Then combine that with the resources available at your public library, UofPeople, free OER, Library Genesis, MOOC providers like EdX and Coursera, plus all the OpenCourseWare that's been uploaded, and you are definitely able to advance quickly for free through the internet. Perhaps you even include on top of that a subscription to Treehouse ($300/yr) or PluralSight ($200/yr) and you'll have many lifetimes of video tutorials to get you moving right along with programming. I really can't emphasize that if you know what you're doing regarding self-study of computer science online (what this website hopes to teach), it's almost impossible to come to a different conclusion than free self-study instead of spending tens of thousands of dollars going to a brick and mortar university, with all the overhead that entails.

If you want to go into debt to study computer science, the options are clear: You could either spend tens of thousands of dollars for a single year at university, or you could use that ten thousand dollars and pay for a PluralSight account for fifty years. Would you rather go to one year of school or get fifty years of PluralSight? Considering the wealth of programming tutorials available on PluralSight, you would be quite satisfied with the conclusion of going with fifty years (an entire lifetime) of PluralSight for the equivalent of _one_ year of college. And the plus side of going with PluralSight is that you can amortize the cost and just work a few hours a year to pay for it along the way, versus going into debt (with the concomitant interest charges). Pay for your education in cash! Never take out a loan, especially in this day and age of internet self study!

Studying computer science will provide you with a job after the necessary study. You have to study a number of languages, a number of frameworks, read many books, and complete a lot of small programs and test sites. You won't get a job just because you have a degree. So why pay for a degree when you can ensure your success as a programmer by studying computer science online for free? Considering you can get a degree for $4000 through UofPeople, there's no reason not to go with the cheapest online degree, especially since most of your work will be on the computer anyway. The important thing is the number of hours you put into self-study in your quest to learn multiple languages and frameworks, not the acquisition of a degree after four years. Considering classes is only one tactic of accomplishing the goal of learning frameworks and computer science principles, you should do some serious cost-benefit analysis when you weigh the cost of a single class versus the number of years of internet study that single class could supply. Often time you'll find the affordability of internet study guarantees that you'll decide your money is better spent studying online versus paying for a brick and mortar college. If you reach this conclusion, as I have, you'll find that you can skip the private universities and self study and still come out with the knowledge needed to acquire a job. As a plus, because you chose frugality versus an over-hyped luxury product, you'll not be in debt nor paying interest on a loan!

If you make a promise to only pay for your study of computer science in cash, a real possibility if you study all the possible free study resources cataloged on this website, you'll find that at the end of four years, depending on how hard you work, you'll be job ready without tens of thousands of dollars in debt. Perhaps you'll even have a CS degree from UofPeople if you could budget for $4000. You'll find that once you start working, you're still obligated to continue studying computer science using the free resources you are now an expert in. So whereas all your colleagues of work the same age as you will be struggling with the learning curve of learning how to study outside of university classrooms, you'll already be a pro and you can keep studying without a single break in the flow of things. Knowing how to study frugally, for free or perhaps $300/yr for a Treehouse or PluralSight account, is a lifelong skill to acquire. The earlier you learn frugal computer science, the more you'll save as you accomplish your learning goals while avoiding debt. Many people never learn these meta-education skills, and are forever entering the loop of relying on brick and mortar universities for their skills acquisition. The degrees they earn are small pittance for the amount of debt they rack up. For some reason, this reckless behavior is seen as respectable in our culture. But once you learn how to program for free, you'll never again see the point in taking out a loan to learn what you can learn for free through the public library. See the recklessness in taking out a loan for something as self-driven as education, and you'll put more emphasis on self study instead of institutional study, considering self-study is the only thing that gets the work done. You're reliant on self-study, so why not skip the interloper (college which costs an arm and a leg) and self-study for free instead of paying for a silly degree?

Unfortunately, the modern college operates on the culture-wide misunderstanding that classrooms are the best method of learning. This simply isn't the case. Video education in computer science is available for $200/year and it is simply amazing. You can pay for fifty years of video education for the cost of a single year of public university. What do you think is the better deal? You won't go in debt, you won't be accumulating interest charges, and you'll be self-sufficient in the skills necessary to be a lifelong computer science learner. If you can cope with the blow to your self esteem that comes from having a degree from "University of the People" instead of "Stanford", then you can compensate with not having a hundred thousand dollars of debt when you're twenty two. Perhaps you can even land a job and begin the steps towards financial independence, putting $18,500 in your retirement 401k from the ages of 22-32, and having enough in your 401k retirement at 32 to begin seeding private investment in Vanguard VTSAX index funds from age 32 to 45 so that you have enough saved up in Vanguard and your 401k to retire and live off the principal accruing in your Vanguard account from ages 45-60, when you can begin withdrawing from your retirement account. Those are some of the possibilities available to people working in the tech sector if they aren't saddled with a ton of debt from college. Instead of spending years paying off interest plus the student loan principal, you're instead accumulating interest in your favor in a retirement fund from a young age, which will enable you to live prosperously at age 60 when you can finally withdraw funds.

All this is possible without going into debt. You should never take out a loan for a computer science education, when so much of the curriculum is available free online. Self-study is the name of the game in computer science education, not the accumulation of degrees. Degrees cost tens of thousands of dollars, while learning how to program and do the duties required for a job costs about $200/year. While studying at your public library won't earn your any prestige, you can still learn the same amount regarding computer science than what you learn acquiring a degree. If you can live without prestige (especially when you weigh its benefits, like financial independence/early retirement), then you'll find that paying in cash for your CS studies is the best option when your goal is to avoid debt.

Of course, this argument might be a moot point for you. Perhaps you don't have enough money to pay for college anyway (and perhaps you're keen enough not to take out a loan on something as expensive as brick and mortar tuition). Perhaps online study, even study at the public library on public computers, is your only option. At which point I can definitely say don't think that you should attempt to somehow come up with the funds necessary for a college education, and instead get to work on online self-study at your public library. Here "cash" isn't just a way to safely guard your money against student debt crisis, "cash" is literally the means by which you plan on learning computer science outside of the university. To which I say, you can succeed in computer science for free if you use OER, Library Genesis, MOOCs/OCW, public library CS stacks, and YouTube. That's the free option; kick in a couple hundred of dollars a year and you can use online video resources like PluralSight or Treehouse. Bonus if Lynda or Treehouse is provided by your public library (be sure to recommend it to them!). Learning to program for $200 a year is a great deal, and the success of computer science to diffuse via the cheaply accessible means of the internet is a huge accomplishment for the future of humanity. Kids will be able to learn to program for free as long as they understand english, have the internet, and have a Raspberry Pi. As years go by, those things will become more and more affordable and accessible. If you truly survey the resources available for beginner programmers on the internet, you'll come to the conclusion that university is a rip-off when it costs $1000 a class, when you could buy PluralSight for five years for the cost of one university class. There is a lifetime of learning available in OER CS books. MIT OpenCourseware provides access to great classes and lectures, not to mention archives of many other school's attempts at Open Courseware, all on YouTube. I'm at the point where I can't even keep up with Treehouse's new courses (which I get for free through my public library), so I barely even use PluralSight, Lynda, or Library Genesis textbooks. Just one free resource keeps me learning after work year after year, learning new frameworks and languages. Think about how redundant these mega online curriculums will be in a few years when there are many options, all for affordable prices! I already have more free resources to learn programming than I currently have time to work through. I'd love to study more open courseware lectures and read more CS textbooks from Library Genesis, but by the time I'm done studying Treehouse after work it's time to go to bed! All of this costs me $200 a year (for a PluralSight account, which I don't even use and could cut out for budgeting reasons). Free computer science education has exploded in recent years, and it will continue to explode as computer science becomes more and more important to the economy and not-year invented technology. It's a very fun time to be a programmer. There are hundreds of options for when you want to study computer science, and all of them are free! If you are willing to forgo the cut to your prestige and avoid paying thousands of dollars for brick and mortar university tuition, then you stand to save a lot of money while not sacrificing anything towards your education.

If you are interested in being a computer scientist, then there is no better use of time than studying the way your public library and open educational resources can be used to promote your studies in CS. I get Lynda and Treehouse for free through my public library. Library Genesis is an international public library for science textbooks. I throw in a PluralSight account for $200 a year, and I'm fulfilled for all my personal studies. When I am motivated and want a break from that action, I peck away at aGupieWare's list of CS open courseware playlists on YouTube. I read the textbook for the course free on my ipad, thanks to Library Genesis. Next year I'm not renewing my account with PluralSight (perhaps I will get it free through my work), so my effective budget for e-learning is the cost of my internet ($45/month). I build test projects and host them on github, where I can test out the software and programming language. None of this costs me any money. I use the laptop provided by my work, and otherwise use a Raspberry Pi or a $400 Mac Mini at home (I have not needed to use either of these computers for two years because I use my work computer for studying after hours). My resume is expanding as I learn new programming languages, and I am accruing experience years by studying while working instead of taking time off and studying in a university. Degrees might expand your earning potential, but so does the number of years of experience you have, and ultimately I am banking on experience years as paying off more than degrees towards my earned salary. I am only working in jobs that offer tuition reimbursement, so I can finish my CS degree at University of the People for roughly a thousand dollars, followed by a Master's at Georgia Tech OMSCS for roughly a couple of thousand of dollars. That way I accumulate experience and degrees, but a fraction of the tuition is paid for by my employer. I am choosing the cheapest online degrees, which means I won't be paying a lot of money out of pocket. Perhaps I'll even wait it out, and continue studying with the free resources provided by my public library and hope that there will eventually be an online CS degree program that is even cheaper than OMSCS and UofPeople. Regardless, I am able to use my free time reading free books from Library Genesis and coding free at Lynda and Treehouse thanks to my public library. I can learn at PluralSight for $17 a month, and I can get tuition reimbursement through my job so I can earn CS degrees for hundreds of dollars instead of tens of thousands of dollars. All of this is possible because I bought the 9th Edition of Liang's Introduction to Java Programming book for $15 off Amazon, and read every chapter and did every single exercise problem (from scratch) at the end of every chapter. My intense self-study of Liang's textbook for a single year enabled me to be proficient and educated in computer science enough to fuel years of self-study using my public library's resources, Library Genesis, and open educational resources. I used an eight year old laptop that I got for free and installed Debian on it.

I now program for a job and save 50% of my aftertax pay, maximizing my 401k contributions ($18,500) and IRA contributions ($5,500) each year to get my retirement paid for while I'm still young and can accrue compounding gains. I live frugally and eat a vegan diet of lentils, oatmeal, pinto beans, brown rice, potatoes, peanut butter, and bulk soy protein powder, effectively bringing my grocery bills down to slightly more than a hundred a month. I have gone from being broke and resourceless (but not in debt) to a strong potential for financial independence, or at least a better quality of life than I had when I was broke. I will say that I have been programming since sixth grade and making web pages since seventh grade, so my learning curve for computer science was very easy to overcome once I started studying at university. But I really love computer science and the only reason I didn't major in it in college was that my college didn't have a computer science department! But self-studying through a myriad of resources, including some classes at the public college in my hometown (totaling $8000), gave me the knowledge necessary to acquire a first programming job with really good benefits, allowing me to continue studying computer science in my free time. I'm on my way to a new career four years after I started involved study, and my quality of life has improved greatly. So far I've spent about $9000 on studying CS (by using free resources from my public library matched with eight CS-only classes at my hometown public uni). That was four years ago, and I was lucky to get Lynda and Treehouse free through my public library after year one, but today with UofPeople, I think I could accomplish the same for around $5000. Or, as this website catalogs, for mere hundreds of dollars if you think you can forgo the CS degree altogether. All paid in cash, of course, with zero loans or interest payments. If you aren't paying cash for your CS degree, you are using the wrong resources for education!

The internet sometimes seems like magic, but if you spend the time studying open education, you'll find that it's not magic, it's just the effort of a dedicated educational community using open source licenses, sometimes relying on institutions like public universities or public libraries to supplement themselves, and using free hosting resources like YouTube or Github. Library Genesis is a gift of mana from the gods unlike any other invention of the past century. A quality education is now available for free in computer science thanks to the dedication of Library Genesis. Sometimes you can afford to be a little amazed by what web developers are able to create when they work as a community towards improving educational resources for people around the world. Give in to the magic. The future lies in open education on the internet, not brick and mortar university classrooms which cost too much.

Manage your career aggressively. Take responsibility for your own education and progress. Sometimes you have to adjust the parameters based on what you can afford. My hope in this website is to teach you how to maximize quality education with the most affordable costs, sometimes balanced to cost nothing at all. Sometimes working and gaining experience is more important than earning a degree. Sometimes you can meld these two constraints together and progress in your education while also working, at a low cost to you. By studying hard so you can acquire those jobs with good benefits like tuition reimbursement, you manage your career aggressively by ensuring you know all those interview questions and know the stack/programming language of your potential employer. Managing your career aggressively is the same as managing your education aggressively. In my particular case, because I was broke (but not in debt), I maximized affordability which meant relying on the internet and my public library. Sure, I guess I missed out on going to Stanford or whatever, but personally I don't care because I'm not a hundred thousand dollars in debt, while working the same job in the industry I want to be in. I like this option more than the college degree option. Your public library (and Library Genesis, etc.), as I repeatedly emphasize, is your ally in all of this, and by using your public library you can really maximize the affordability of learning to program. If you are aggressive in your frugality, and make demands like never taking out a loan for CS education, you'll reap the rewards that are possible with a career in computer science, such as financial independence/early retirement. But even if I can't FIRE, I'm still happy with the quality of life that I can sustain now because I taught myself to program on a TRS-80 (now you would do the equivalent on a Raspberry Pi) when I was eleven. Enjoy the fruits of your intense self-study. Don't believe the siren's call that self-study has to be expensive. Use old computers matched with Debian Linux, use free open educational resources, and use your public library. Self-study can be extremely intense for levels approaching free, and the money you'll save will "compound" for you because you'll be able to afford studying CS for longer amounts of time, allowing you to study more advanced topics which will earn you jobs that pay more. I want to emphasize how going to an ivy league school or Stanford or something is pretty cool, but teaching yourself computer science for $5000 in your hometown is also really cool in that sort of hacker way that some rare people come to appreciate (also called unschooling). I don't personally care which path your choose, I have no skin in the game, I only know that I really appreciate the path that I chose (the $9000 hometown path) which was possible due to some really smart and dedicated people on the internet and at my hometown public uni and public library, so I am writing about that path on my blog in case any one else is interested in the details. I think many will be, because student debt is so extremely unattractive and dangerous. I think many will be because that path, in this day and age, can be accomplished for mere hundreds of dollars.

Never be baited into believing education should cost money. For some reason, people believe that if they put money into their education, they'll receive a superior product. Unfortunately tutorials are the same whether free or proprietary, and there are a zillion free tutorials in computer science, so if you pay for education just know that you are paying for someone else's salary instead of putting that money into your own. With research, you'll find ways of finding free and open education on the internet that is the exact same quality as that which you would pay tens of thousands of dollars for at university. The deciding factor is your motivation to self-study, and once that is finalized by the intrinsically motivating factors like saving money and not being in debt, possibly leading to financial independence/early retirement, free online education will be your favorite new thing. It's quite amazing, truly, what is possible through the internet and resources like Google and Github. What used to cost tens of thousands of dollars at brick and mortar university are just lying around free on the street for anyone to pick up. If you are unaware of these progresses in cybereducation, you risk relying on the older model of education which hopes to maximize _their_ profits off your ignorance. By dedicating a few days to learning about OER through this blog, you'll find that this new model of open education hopes to maximize _your_ profits. Liberal democracy is an amazing thing, and the technology it has created is "eating" the old model of university and replacing it with a completely free model called open education. You make some sacrifices, (you don't get to live in a dorm that looks like a castle, with a luxurious meal plan with cooks that will prepare food for you) but ultimately you gain financial independence at a much faster rate without those pesky student loans. It is a sacrifice I am willing to take, and one that I took and am now living more than comfortably. If my arguments and anecdotes are successful, I hope others will also jump on board open education and avoid student debt crisis. I'd rather your money be accruing gains at a young age, not accruing interest. Live and self-educate frugally and you'll be better positioned for a rewarding career that lets you thrive as an engineer while maximizing your savings so that you can become financially independent (when your gains accrued off your low-expense index funds exceeds your yearly costs of living, and you are no longer reliant on a job). This sort of accomplishment can only be achieved through frugality and extreme saving. I don't see why frugality shouldn't be extended to computer science education, especially when there are quality alternatives for free. As with any frugality, there are costs to your choice to be frugal, but in my opinion those costs are negligible ("oh no, you don't have a CS degree from a prestigious private university! oh no, you don't have a fancy make of car! oh no, you don't wear designer clothes!") which really don't account for anything in real life.

This isn't a get rich scheme I'm coming up with and trying to sell off for personal profit. I'm just making sure that people are aware of the alternatives to university education, so they don't find themselves head over heels in lifelong debt after just four years of late-teenage life. Kids should know the repercussions of going into debt, especially for something as ubiquitously free and online as computer science education is in 2018. Technology has advanced so quickly that college-level education in CS are available online for free or perhaps just a couple hundred dollars a year. Enjoy the fruits of people's labor and self-educate from the online non-profit commons created by thousands of people for your personal gain. There's no scheme, no trick, just ubiquitous free CS books (and minor benefits like a UofPeople CS degree for $4000 total or a master's with Georgia Tech's OMSCS for $7000) which you can study on a Raspberry Pi for the cost of internet, after four years of hard work you'll be able to get a job. It's not magic, it's the power of self-study and unschooling, with a little help from open source licenses. Traditional brick and mortar college for computer science is over! Done! Deprecated! Replaced! Negligible!


