---
date: "2019-05-28"
title: "Squad Goals vs. Philanthropy Goals"
ghissue: 76
---


I ran the numbers today and saw that if I worked until I was 70 and contributed $35,000 into savings every year for the next 35 years and earned 10% (and that's assuming no pay raises and also saving at my current rate with no increases, which is highly unlikely), I would retire with roughly $12 million dollars. That's more than enough money to live out the rest of my life using the 4% principle, especially if I don't have any lifestyle inflation.  What would I do with the leftover money when I die?

I read an article on [Inside Higher Ed](https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2019/02/08/large-donation-small-community-college-changes-outlook-fund-raising-two-year) about the scarcity of donations to community colleges. I have many friends whose lives were helped by community colleges in their hometown, and I am a big proponent of using them as a launch pad for a [$5200 F-You Degree](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree). And as a Topekan who goes out on weekend daytrips through rural NE Kansas with my parents to sightsee from their car and visit shops, I love rural Kansas towns.

There are 19 community colleges in Kansas. Assuming I live off the 4% rule after retirement ($480,000 a year, which is again absurd), my $12 million principal will remain until I die. That means in my will I can donate roughly $630,000 to each community college in Kansas.

This is a laudable goal, and as a result I'm no longer going to try and retire early but instead be a philanthropist for Kansas community colleges when I die by working hard. Perhaps in forty years the landscape of community colleges will change thanks to the internet and technology, but I doubt it. They are such an awesome resource for kids and adults.

My other idea for philanthropy was to sponsor scholarships for women to study computer science at Washburn University, or perhaps something like buying a Raspberry Pi for each incoming CS student. Perhaps I will modify my community college idea by only donating to the computer science department of the CC, if that's even possible, as a sort of CS grant to each department. At 5% withdrawal, that's $30,000 per year to each CS department. I'm just not sure individual departments have endowments. I want community college to be THE place to kick off a programming career for rural Kansans, especially in combination with philanthropic EdTech efforts like Khan Academy, Treehouse, University of the People, and Georgia Tech OMSCS which let you earn up to a masters in computer science for very little money no matter where you're located.

I also plan to make Holm School a nonprofit once people actually start to use the website and there is some momentum behind it. Promoting affordable college-level CS education is important business in the day and age of the internet (which makes living in rural cities much more pleasant, resource-wise). We need podcasts and videos and books and everything else someday!

\[One Day Later\]: I actually think I've changed my plan and now want to focus on donating to my alma mater, the Topeka Public Library. What I'd like to do is set up a fund that pays for scholarships for a select number of applicants to attend University of the People to study computer science. It would cost roughly $1000 per student per year. Even a $100,000 endowment could sponsor 4 students in perpetuity at 4% withdrawal. They could use the Topeka public library's free Treehouse subscription to augment their studies.

This meshes more with my current techno utopian dreams, too, because I truly believe that in the future you will earn your bachelors in science in computer science for free through your public library. At the point in which subscriptions to every book ever published, in a Spotify-for-books app, are affordable, public libraries will be able to pay for digital copies of books very inexpensively and will have more money to focus on proprietary educational resources (like Treehouse subscriptions, for example). As the cost of philanthropic low-cost online colleges for computer science decrease, such as University of the People or any other competitor, over time public libraries will be able to sponsor students to study at these colleges. Essentially a Treehouse subscription costs $300 and a UoPeople subscription costs $1000 a year, so at the point in which UoPeople is as inexpensive as Treehouse, libraries will subscribe on their patron's behalf. I would not be surprised in ten years if you could earn a bachelor's degree at the public library. Truth told, it's almost a moot point now, because a Treehouse subscription, if you 100% complete every course over four years, is practically the same as an undergraduate degree in CS. If you 100%'d Treehouse, it would be amazing if you couldn't land a job. I landed a programming job with just a few months total of study at Treehouse mixed with two years of studying CS at university.

So we'll see what the landscape of online EdTech looks like in 35 years. All this could be redundant and people could already be getting free online bachelor's degrees in computer science through their public library. Treehouse and Lynda subscriptions point to a bright future for students looking to study CS for free.

