---
date: "2019-06-23"
title: "Some Principles of Learning Computer Science Affordably"
ghissue: 88
---


Principle One: Don’t Go To A College With Any Liberal Arts Departments/Degrees. This is ground zero for scam #1: Get unaware science students to supplement a disastrous liberal arts departments. Liberal arts departments suck all the money from their students, leaving them with a worthless degree for tens/hundreds of thousands of dollars, and teach them “brilliant” (cough cough… crappy) postmodernism/anticapitalism/antienlightenment for as many years as they can get past unaware parents. Colleges could be so streamlined if they skipped the liberal arts department. Basically just like computer science, learning the humanities should cost you zero dollars through a public library/online library. The idea that you have to pay good money at a young age just to read books is patently exploitation. You won’t get a job in your liberal arts major, especially anything that you could do without a costly college degree, and the education you receive, if not jaundiced by postmodernism, could be self-taught for free. Paying liberal arts professors just perpetuates the exploitation by student loans, and until these departments are ejected from colleges, you shouldn’t pay to attend a college. There are many nonprofit schools that don’t have liberal arts departments/degrees, such as University of the People and GATech OMSCS. Great Books courses/curricula can be downloaded for free off Project Gutenberg/Library Genesis and read on your own time, rather than on your own dime. I think the humanities are great and should be a principle of everyone’s education. I’m just confused about why that is presumed to be worth tens of thousands of dollars when I can do it for free through my public library/online library.

Principle Two: Stick with Nonprofits, Accepting Affordable For-Profits that Only Cost a Couple Hundred a Year. That is to say, if you get a degree, make sure it is from a nonprofit that costs as minimal of amount as possible to you. Aim to get a full ride to a university if you decide to go to a university at all. Don’t fall for gimmicky companies like Udacity that are for-profit and cost a lot more than other for-profit companies like PluralSight/Treehouse/Lynda that can leave you with debt for a just short duration of class time. For profit companies are kind of scammy, and paying anything more than a couple hundred of dollars a year to attend is like setting your money on fire. Basically only nonprofit degrees are worthwhile, truth be told. If you think you need to attend an expensive for-profit company to learn “the cutting edge,” you might be falling for advertising more than relevant educational experiences. There’s a lot of false hope. My budget for for-profit companies the past two years is $200 a year, and so far haven’t had any buyer’s regret. Currently, with my company paying for my PluralSight account and my public library paying for my Treehouse and Lynda account, my budget for for-profit education is zero, and I don’t feel like I am missing out of anything.

Principle Three: Don’t Worry About Resume Fodder/Degrees/Prestige. You are trying to become a computer scientist, not a walking medallion board. A task in computer science is accomplished by being knowledgeable about computer science, not by having a degree. Many people fret that if they don’t have a prestigious degree, they won’t be able to do computer science. My guess is that if you know computer science, you will get paid to do computer science work. Learning CS, fortunately, can be a very affordable process, costly at most a couple hundred a year. A degree never solved a computer science problem, a program developed by an educated computer scientist did.

Principle Four: Open Source is Quality in the Fact that Anyone Can Remedy a Problem. Open Source is sort of like peer review: If something is broken, anyone can fix it. The idea that using open source technology to fuel a computer science education might have once been seen as pie-in-the-sky, but with the progress of open source in computer science, there is no reason to assume it’s principles won’t also consume 100% of future educational processes. If you aren’t using open source computer science educations, you are probably getting ripped off. Just like you shouldn’t pay for an anti-Enlightenment liberal arts department, you shouldn’t pay for proprietary education when open source solutions exist and are free. If someone wants you to learn from proprietary resources, they will pay on your behalf: i.e. a job/internship paying for a PluralSight account or a public library (government) paying for a Treehouse/Lynda/SafariBooks account. You’re responsible for finding open source education resources, which means you need some education about open source education if you’re not capable of doing that on your own, but let other interests pay for non-open source educations. That seed money should be their burden, not yours. Open Source is free and philanthropic, and should be the foundation of contemporary computer science educations. If there is something wrong with an open source curriculum, someone else (or even YOU) can pull request the correction or else fork it yourself. In the world of modern society, if something isn’t open source you should be extremely skeptical of it. It might have some problems with it (including cost) that can’t be remedied by other people.

Principle Five: Github Will Someday Become an EdTech Provider. I can see computer classes being uploaded to Github in the future rather than YouTube. I can see CS education curriculum by default being hosted on github rather than other websites. I can see Github developing educational tools that will facilitate classes including discussion and supplemental reading. I can see people adapting github to provide fantastic educations in computer science with zero overhead costs and zero proprietary licenses that block adoption in low-wealth communities from participating. I can see free hosting for open source EdTech websites and groups. I can see people attending college on Github rather than enrolling at private universities, since Github will provide college-equivalent courses for free. I can see Github becoming an EdTech facilitator that makes non-free education obsolete. I think that end stage is in it’s beginning phases now, but that it won’t take long if Microsoft takes an interest in Github’s advantages for EdTech. I can see nonprofit open source EdTech as dominating future learning in facilitated by Github. I can see Github getting better and better for free educational communities and their students. I can see class conferences being attended on Github, and live courses being recorded and archived there too. I can see University of the People’s model of having volunteer professors being mirrored by Github repos and using volunteer professors to facilitate live classes using archived open source material. I can see great computer science books being made open source and hosted for free on Github. I can see everything needed for a college level computer science education being readily available for free on Github. I can see universities moving onto Github, and new Github-exclusive universities being invented. I can see Github becoming or at least creating an LMS. I think the combination of open source educational resources coupled with Github being an explosive power that can truly shake up the world. To ignore this potential is to risk money that could be put into index funds at a young age instead. If you are convinced Github is awesome for modern education now, as I am, it'll only get better in the future!

Principle Six: Success With Open Source EdTech Doesn’t Require Every Competitor to Collapse. I don’t want non-open source education facilities to burn. I think they should exist and be held responsible in the free markets. It is not a zero sum game, that in order for OER to succeed, colleges must burn. Things are obviously going to change, and I hope public universities, especially CS departments, realize that instead of competing with OER they should adopt and contribute to it. Though some greed will play a factor, I think the potential of some faculties to embrace OER rather than debase it holds explosive potential. If public universities could find a way to reduce their cost to be competitive with a couple of hundreds of dollars a year, then I wish them success, not failure. If public universities embrace open source, then I hope they succeed in the new millennium rather than going away. I don’t even think open source will be mandatory in the future, though I think smart people will realize if they aren’t using open source products they are risking their money. I think people should be free to use their money in ways they wish. But I hope they are educated about the changing landscape thanks to the invention of the internet, and the radical potential OER offers versus the-way-it’s-always-been-done. That’s why I promote meta-education, and create this blog to talk about it. Not because I want to top-down eradicate all non-open source companies, but because I believe the market should decide and the more literate people are about open source the less they’ll believe in tradition/superstition versus science/free-speech.

Principle Seven: This is About Happiness. https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2016/06/08/happiness-is-the-only-logical-pursuit/ This also applies to college, and should steer your decision tree. For some, sacrificing the happiness of prestige for the [happiness of millions](https://holm.school/retire-a-millionaire-by-skipping-college/) of dollars in retirement and early financial independence is a proper, well-examined, and rational decision. For some, they may settle on pursuing prestige. Everyone’s different. I am a proponent of FIRE and frugality, however, and think that should play a part in decisions even surrounding such traditional institutions as bricks and mortar colleges.
