---
date: "2019-01-03"
title: "Retire a Millionaire by Skipping College"
---

I was playing around with a compound calculator today, wondering about how someone could benefit by not having to pay tuition costs when they turned 22. If, instead of entering the work force with a multi-year challenge of paying off $60,000 in college debt, they instead invested that $60,000 in VTSAX at the age of 18.

I've made this argument before, that instead of paying tuition, you should just buy a cheap house to live in for the rest of your life. But to put the opportunity cost of graduating with debt in perspective, things really become stark if you compound your tuition.

Let's say you decide to go with the Holm Schooling course lined out of these pages. Instead of going to college, you are going to use your public library, a cheap PluralSight account, and Library Genesis to study computer science for four years from age 18-22 instead of enrolling in college. If you took the $60,000 you would have spent on tuition, which you are obligated to pay back starting around age 22, you would have 47 years for which you could be compounding. Retire at 65, invest $60,000 at age 18 instead of paying tuition = 47 years of compounding. By paying tuition instead of investing that $60,000, you are turning down roughly $1,442,742 at retirement, compounded at 7% gain.

I think 1.4 million dollars speaks for itself. By going into debt while young, you are sacrificing the potential compounded gains of investing early. If I were young, I would be doing everything possible in my power to avoid any and all debt, while trying to get a programming job as soon as possible so I could start maxing out my 401k and IRA. By living frugally when young and investing 50-80% of your take home pay into VTSAX or VFIAX index funds, you are allowing yourself to set into motion compounding gains that you can sit back and watch develop into a retirement savings with only 10 years of work, when you are 22-32.

Let's run the calculator another way. In this circumstance, you don't get the value of tuition up front as a benefit of avoiding tuition. Instead, you have to begin your IRA when you are 22, fresh out of studying computer science for four years using OER and your public library. With no debt, you can sock that first years salary into saving. Say you make $55,000. If you save 80% of your pay by maxing out your 401k ($19,000 pretax), IRA ($6000 pretax), and then putting the rest into a post-tax Vanguard brokerage account ($15,000 posttax), you could see around $40,000 being saved every year.

Put $40,000 principle into a compound calculator at 7% for 9 years and you wind up being 32 years old with $586,196 in savings. Not enough to retire on, but then again you have to consider that your salary will probably go up with ten years experience. Sit on that $586k from ages 32-65 and let it compound and you wind up retired at 65 with $5,466,479. Of course, if you keep living frugally and working from ages 33-65, you wind up retired at 65 with $10.56 million dollars. Of course, that's not including housing, but if you buy affordable housing the hit shouldn't be too large.

Chew on that. If you save $40,000 every year by living frugally from ages 22-65, you can retire with $11 million dollars. $40,000 is a lot to save every year, but if you do things like live at home throughout your twenties and eat Whole Foods plant-based vegan food like beans, lentils, oatmeal, and potatoes, you can seriously at least see how living frugally as a computer scientist (with all the free online education opportunities you have) permits you to either retire extremely well, or else retire early.

And that's what I want to convey about college tuition. It's simply way too expensive given the values you should hold at age 18-22. You should be trying to get a first job while spending as little money as possible on education, so that you can begin saving while you're young to get compounding gains for 40 years instead of just 20-30. You should view debt as anathema, because your goals should be to live as frugally as possible from age 22-32 so that you can dump all your earnings into your 401k, IRA, and post-tax Vanguard account. If you earn a median programming wage of $50-60k a year from ages 22 to 42, you could retire at 42 with a 80% savings rate. If your salary swells to around $100k by the time you're mid twenties, you could retire by 35 if you maintain that savings rate.

If you don't believe me, just play around with a compound calculator with an 80% savings rate and a salary of $50k from projective ages of 22 to 65. You'll see staggering numbers that quickly provide enough of a nest egg to retire off of by the time your 65. Computer programming is not only a good job, but you can study it for free with OER, your public library, and Library Genesis. By avoiding student debt at the critical ages of 22-32 when you should be building up your savings account to prepare for decades of compounding, you are building for yourself a future.

The ironic thing would be to put yourself in the shoes of a parent. Instead of paying $60,000 when your kid turns 22, invest that money on your kid's behalf when they are born. If you saved up for your kid's college before they were even born, 65 years of compounding on an initial investment of $60,000 would be $4.88 million dollars. That's if you put the opportunity cost of college tuition into a savings account owned by your baby when they were born. Since that's entirely feasible of a circumstance, college could wind up costing you $4.88 million dollars. That's the power of compounding interest. You want it to work in your favor by saving compounded gains, not against you by being in debt paying interest charges.

I think as FIRE (financial independence/early retirement) takes off, people are going to begin to look at ways of building up impressive savings account at the critical age of 18-32. The easiest boost to savings rate would obviously be not having to pay college tuition debt. Given that FIRE is sort of a computer scientist's subculture, given that programming jobs usually pay the high enough salaries that permit early retirement, it's not going to be long before the FIRE "curriculum" not just becomes frugality, savings rates, VTSAX and index funds, and programming jobs, but free computer science education through your public library and OER. That's the most obvious conclusion I suspect we'll see in the FIRE subculture in the next decade or so. Now that people have realized early retirement is possible through computer science plus FIRE, avoiding college debt will result in people choosing not to enroll in college while 18-22 and instead study CS at home through the internet for the cost of four years of broadband. The benefits are truly remarkable: $1.1 million by the time you retire at 65 by compounding $60k, saved by avoiding tuition, for 43 years at 7% return.

The results are flabbergasting: Nearly everyone has the possibility to retire well at 65 just by investing the money at 22 saved by avoiding college tuition by studying CS at home using your public library, OER, and Library Genesis. With that sort of return, the benefits of being an internet-taught computer scientist will become more and more attractive to teenagers. Convincing teenagers not to go to college to study Computer Science requires pages like Mr. Money Mustache to show how important extreme saving is while you're young. As teenagers interested in early retirement become more and more committed to extreme frugality and saving at a younger and younger age, they will start to see that being a computer scientist doesn't require college but pays well and can be learned for free on the internet. I think these things will just sort of bubble to the surface and curriculums like Holm School based around OER will start showing their utility for the FIRE crowd. I'm going to keep working on this web pages to ensure it becomes a valuable source to people looking to become computer scientists for the cheapest route possible. When the stakes are as important as not having to work anymore and being able to pursue things that interest you, the risk of debt from college tuition will start to show itself as dangerous and more and more unattractive.

When the common ground in comparison is a career as a computer scientist, people will begin to realize that going to college actually costs you more money than not going to college. The typical belief is that going to college will earn you more money during a lifetime. But in the case of computer science, where online education in programming is ubiquitous and free, that simply won't be the viewpoint of computer scientists in the future. If you just invested the cost of college tuition and studied CS until you got a job using this website, you could be assured a comfortable retirement with hardly any work just on the earnings of that principal compounded over 40 years alone. When the stakes are that drastic, computer scientists who study FIRE will start skipping college in order to retire a millionaire.



