---
date: "2019-06-04"
title: "Screen Time as an Enemy of the Good"
ghissue: 83
---

I am not a huge fan of screen time. I'd much rather be offline reading a book than surfing the web or, god forbid, social media (which I haven't been on in 11 years), so I'm sort of perplexed by writing a website that promotes online learning. Isn't college inherently better because it involves face to face, interpersonal communication whereas all this internet stuff basically sucks emotionally and drains happiness? Maybe...?

The way I think of it, screen time is just the modern day black lung of being a computer scientist. Whereas it would be awesome to conduct your actual job work through pen and paper and deadwood materials, that isn't how programming jobs are. You're going to spend 9 hours a day on your laptop whether you want to or not. It's a job hazard, and one you should read about and strategize about how to minimize its physical and emotional impact.

When I was in school studying CS, I loved to learn online on my laptop. But when I got my first job, I noticed after staring at a laptop screen for 8 hours, when I got home I felt zero desire to spend a single minute more on my own personal computer doing personal things. This had the ramification of greatly minimizing my time devoted to studying Treehouse and Lynda in my free time, since I just didn't want to code any more, especially when it wasn't required. So I did not pull any heroic feats of 15+ hours of coding on a daily basis. Instead I got into a running habit and read personal finance books on my ipad at the university library. This was actually very beneficial, it turns out, because I learned about financial independence, but that came at the sacrifice of not improving my developer skills as much as I had planned I would while employed.

I now look at things like tuition reimbursement as sort of a double edged sword, where having to study online AFTER work seems like a disaster waiting to happen, given my propensity to be screen fatigued after working 8-5. So far I have not taken up any tuition reimbursement offers, though I think I'll try next Spring with OMSCS. I realize now that having a hobby outside of programming is a great way to permit self improvement even if that self improvement isn't programming based. Not everything needs to be about programming, and though I desire to do great things in the world, I'll have to accept a diminished dream in realization that screen fatigue is a real and powerful force.

It's ironic that videos are such an improvement upon paper books where learning to code is concerned, because the very computer that those lessons are delivered on can become an enemy after spending 9 hours at work staring at one. I know OER doesn't really exist in print form for free, and I know libraries are now subscribing to book repositories like Safari Books instead of buying deadwood copies, so it looks like if I want to even read a book I'm going to be on at least an ipad, if not a laptop. That's unfortunate, but I realize that "free" is worth it whereas the alternative is paying tuition to a college to attend class and have access to their university library. I can deal with screen fatigue in exchange for a free education. I'm not about to go into debt while young just for deeper study sessions with books. I think in the future people will discuss screen fatigue for programmers and some solutions will be experimented upon and eventually hammered out. I await that day.

One solution I've found is just to study programming on the weekends while employed. I can read the personal finance books I want to read during the weeknights, then use my weekends for CS. This works personally, but obviously not for a masters degree or something like that, because that would require weekday work and the "study" returns are greatly diminished versus whole-week study. Still, it is the best solution I've found, and if you match it with things like being sure you don't procrastinate on your chores like laundry and grocery shopping until the weekend and do them after weekday work instead when you're burnt out with screens, you'll have more time for studying CS on the weekend.
With OER/OCW/EdTech, it's much more affordable to study on the computer. But there are limitations, as with anything. If you can spend all day on a computer, hats off to you. Personally I prefer reading on my ipad than on my laptop, and the thought of reading pdfs and ebooks on a laptop makes me shudder. I mix media as a way to combat screen fatigue while still being able to use free OER. Though print is always ideal, I realize that print books probably won't exist in the future for computer science topics. Finding ways to cope with digital consumption is important considerations for anyone working as a programmer that still spends much of their free time studying CS.
