---
date: "2019-05-26"
title: "The Secrets of Compounding Interest, From A Programmer's Perspective"
ghissue: 74
---

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/mec-QpjQMXY" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

One of the benefits of learning binary is that you become quite adept at learning how to convert 2^x values into an appropriate approximation. 2^10 is roughly equal to 1,000, 2^20 is roughly equal to 1,000,000, 2^30 is roughly equal to 1,000,000,000, etc. The power, divided by ten, is 10 raised to that number. The numbers in between, after you determine the number of zeros, is just 2 raised to that value modulus ten, i.e. 2^14 is 1,000 times 2^4, or 16,000, and 2^24 is 1,000,000 time 2^4, or 16,000,000.

Learning binary is a great way to learn the power of doubling. Just adding a single number to the power of two results in an explosion of the base ten number's value. Think how long it would take to count between the various powers of 2 if you were individually saying the ticks, it would become too long to pursue very quickly. The power of doubling is apparent when you study base two.

The import lies in learning about the Rule of 72, or the rough approximation that the amount of time for your investment to double is 72 divided by the interest rate. For a total stock market index fund or S&P500 index fund, your interest rate is around 10%. So it takes approximately 7 years for your investment to double. That's an amazing realization, that you can double your money every seven years. Mix that with the inherent understanding of binary digits that many computer scientists have, and you'll discover that doubling your money is extremely powerful! Take the results of the Rule of 72 for a given interest rate, and then raise 2 to the power of number of times you can double for a given time span. 40 years of 10% interest (age 25-65) is 5.7... 2 to the fifth is 32 and two to the sixth is 64, so choose a number between 32 and 64 to cover that .7 decimal... An investment amount at age 25 is going to be multiplied by ~48 given that time span (maxing out your 401k and IRA from 22-25 would enable $75,000 of principal, or $3.4 million (which is roughly 75k * 48)). That is to say, the amount you save at 22-25 is worth 48 times its face value. Ponder that for your retirement goals! The longer you wait, the smaller the multiplicator. That's the magic of compounding and the rule of seventy-two. It's a real world instance of binary and adding an exponent to 2.

When you're talking about investment time spans, even early investments in VTSAX/VFIAX at age 22 have the opportunity to double five and a half times by the time you're sixty. That's two to the power of five, or roughly multiplying your investment by 32. That means, when you are young and starting your career, a maxed out 401k and IRA are going to be worth 32 times the amount you put in. What a golden opportunity, it's almost like mathematics from the heavens. That is to say, when you analyze the cost of college, you need to multiply what your tuition will be by 32! A $60,000 private college degree is equivalent to $1.92 million dollars opportunity cost. That's why you can see how dangerous debt is when you're young, because you're stuck paying off debt for meaningless trivialities like pretigious degrees when you could be putting that money into index funds. Avoiding debt, especially during your youth, enables you to do life hacks like maxing out your 401k and IRA and putting that money into index funds, which enable you to earn 3200% gains during the decades up until your retirement. That's why colleges are especially devastating financially. That student loan costs you 32 times the list price. Would you pay a million dollars to learn to code when there are a panoply of free resources to learn programming online, which you could study instead? Learning to program is certainly valuable, since a programming job is very lucrative (and fun!). Why not gain the benefit of a programming job with the benefit of avoiding early debt, and teach yourself to program free using OER, or affordably with Treehouse/Lynda/PluralSight + UoPeople?

It's become a joke in personal finance to condemn every expense when you're young as being many times what it's worth, i.e. a cup of coffee costing you $128 dollars instead of $4 when you're 22, but there has to be an enlightened mindset that recognizes that yes, frivolous expenses when you're young _does_ explode! Maybe you should nix that Starbucks habit! Or better yet, avoid that student loan that's many tens of thousands of dollars (times THAT by 32!). Opportunity costs are just as real as any other financial mechanism. Realizing that when you're young is a tremendous blessing. Perhaps it can motivate you to study computer science using one of the affordable paths detailed on Holm School. Perhaps it will change you into an 'extremely' frugal person, when you grok that expenses are multiplied by 32. There are a lot of possibilities to discover related to this, but my hope with this blog is that you realize it at 18 instead of 35. By then, the equivalent amount of work you must pump into your investment vehicles are depressingly extreme. Do you want to be 'extreme' at 18, or 35? Either way, whether you procrastinate or whether you seize the opportunity index investing offers you at the start of your career, you'll have to behave in 'extreme' ways. People malign the FIRE movement for being extreme, but in my opinion it's just as extreme to ignore the rich opportunity compound interest offers you. Be extreme in a way that directly benefits you, instead of being extremely deprived!

Personal finance is a great hobby to have if you're a computer scientist. Just by doing a few nochalant tasks like reading Mr. Money Mustache or JL Collins, you can implement a saving and investing technique that enables luxuries like early retirement and carefree retirements. The return on investment learning how to code is equally matched by the return on investment regarding learning how to be financially independent. Take both opportunities that free internet resources offer, like [the free catalog of index fund books](https://github.com/holmschool/free-index-funds-books) and the [Holm School computer science curriculum](https://github.com/HolmSchool/HolmSchool) to truly study ideas that are empowering and life enriching. This is the gift that the internet brings to every one of us. Don't squander your time by ignoring the opportunity. For just a few years of work and hard study when you're young, you'll have a lifetime of empowerment as you age.
I can attest, just by going to the local university in my hometown for two years and making copious use of the resources available at my public library and on github, I've turned my life around. Rather than working at Chipotle's for the rest of my life, I now am poised for a comfortable retirement. I hope it doesn't come off as bragging, instead I want to promote the rich opportunities that are available in your hometown as well as online. Most of us like to think that we're in an unfortunate position regarding where we were born, but a public library is an amazing place! Dreams can come true there. Unfortunately for many, it seems that it's [main competitor](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=azM6xSTT2I0), expensive colleges, are destroying dreams rather than enabling them. What a sorry circumstance, but education about education stands a chance of changing that ruthless victimization.

I'm sure you're heard the various quotes from Einstein and Buffet about the power of compounding, but find a way to incorporate its principles into your choices as a young programmer. Even some not-so-extreme 'extreme' choices like frugality can reward you handsomely for your sacrifices. You're either sacrificing when you're old or when you're young, and given that one circumstance requires you working until you're 70 and the other permits you to stop working at 40 and pursue your passions, I hope the stakes are self-explicating. The three factors in profit gains from investing are amount invested, time invested, and rate of return. Nixing things like rate of return by choosing hard-coded index funds and maxing out your 401k and IRA to hard-code amount invested, leaves you with just time invested as under your control. By living frugally even from a young age and avoiding the decadence of college will let you squidge that "time invested" amount to its maximum once you start your career as a programmer at 22. Even just seven years extra doubles your savings! Wow, how friggin important and crucial is that knowledge!?!?

It's especially infuriating to me when I take a look back at my life, and realize that I was programmed away from my interest in the stock market that developed during middle school and into the cult of anti-capitalism during my time at university pursuing a liberal arts bachelors degree. Perhaps if I could blame myself entirely for that programming, I wouldn't have much impetus to discuss it publically on something like a blog. However, anti-capitalism is rife within the liberal arts, and many students are right now studying it as assigned reading for their major. This kind of "indoctrination" is actually widespread in America, and it directly impacts students by making them second guess their interest in the stock market and investing. Rather than pursuing a well paying STEM degree in order to find full employability, even one that permits copious amounts of savings when coupled with some modicum of frugality, many students are enticed into spending some of their most valuable years studying what amounts to hot air. They don't find employability beyond minimum wage jobs. They don't change the world. They instead become brainwashed to hate America and resent the opportunities that are available, feeling that working towards revolution is more valuable than working a career. It's quite dismal, and that's why I was so thrilled while studying computer science to discover that learning programming is very easy outside the realm of the university. Why not kill two birds with one stone and undermine liberal arts departments while also empowering yourself career-wise and avoid programming by the anticapitalist cult-think. I honestly believe that the harm done to kids by liberal arts departments will have to be addressed at some point, and that's why I think Jordan Peterson is so successful, but I'm going to do my part by writing at Holm School. Knowing that investments double every seven-point-two years when invested in index funds truly changes your feelings of victimization by "America" and enables better understanding of the power of ideological cults to wreck lives. Avoiding university not only makes sense financially, but also in terms of avoiding life-altering wastes of time. There is no future in anticapitalism. Being a free market liberal is worth its weight in gold when you start living according to sound, peaceful, Enlightened, and democratic principles. Don't squander your life in a resentment-ridden ideological trashbin.

Being a moderate free market liberal isn't cool the day and age of Bernie Sanders, but the alternative is quite dire: waste the most valuable years of your life following a nihilistic philosophy that doesn't hold weight in the real world and throughout human history, and saddle yourself with the concomitant enormous student debt, the "badge" that you're properly brainwashed to resent America and democracy. It's a queer show that students take pride in the student debt they take on at 22, pursuing a non-existent career as a "liberal artist." Considering the [fundamental tenent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liberalism) of the "liberal" word behind "liberal artist" is free market capitalism and democracy, it's especially devastating that students ignore the roots of the trivium and quadrivium of education, in things like the Great Alexandrian Library or the Athenic gymnasium. Being a liberal doesn't mean one should never participate in anything deemed "capitalistic" or wealth-enabling like investing. What a sorry state of the world that that is what professors in academia teach in their curricula. That's why I hope you find resources like Holm School, Treehouse, and Mr. Money Mustache useful, and why I'm creating a virtual curriculum and blog around them.

Best of luck in your career as a self-taught programmer, and thank you for reading! Let me know your experiences about when you "grokked" compound interest, and what you did as a result.
