---
date: "2018-09-05"
title: "The Teenage Liberation Handbook"
ghissue: 6
---

The name "Holm School" is an obvious pun about how I'm promoting home schooling when it comes to computer science at the college level. Let me explain the gestation behind my theory, and let me remind you, that this is _not_ what I did myself, so be critical of everything I suggest: I studied at a local public college for two years and moonlighted at Treehouse and that was sufficient to start my programming career, not to mention I had a liberal arts B.A. But concurrent with my enrollment in college to study computer science I began reading about unschooling. My favorite reading from this period was Grace Llewellyn's The Teenage Liberation Handbook: How to Quit School and Get a Real Life and Education (1998). The book makes a plea for unschooling: home schooling without all the sticky stigma of Christian fundamentalism. My second favorite book I read during this time was the blog "100 Reasons not to go to graduate school" (http://100rsns.blogspot.com/) which I came across as a result of reading William Panneckar (["Graduate School in the Humanities: Just Don't Go"](https://www.chronicle.com/article/Graduate-School-in-the/44846), ["Just Don't Go, Part 2"](https://www.chronicle.com/article/Just-Dont-Go-Part-2/44786?cid=rclink), ["The Big Lie About the 'Life of the Mind'"](https://www.chronicle.com/article/The-Big-Lie-About-the-Life-of/63937?cid=rclink)). The general gist of unschooling and the dismal outlook on graduate school for the humanities cemented my decision to abandon anything related to the university as it most likely had nothing to offer a computer scientist at an affordable price. I wrapped up the classes I was enrolled in and after two years in the CS department called it quits and started studying at home. Fortunately it turned out those two years of study were enough to get me a job, so I never had the opportunity to unschool. But I believe that it would have been a frugal choice given the fact that even the local college in my town was $1000 a class. I don't believe you need a bachelor's degree in computer science when your public library offers Treehouse and Lynda for self-study, and you can learn web development and build a resume/portfolio for free. When you benefit so much from your public library (and honestly my public university's classes were especially helpful too-- they motivated me to study extra hard to the point when I was a semester ahead in our java textbook after three months) you begin to realize that the future of computer science education is online, and not in expensive universities. I don't need a bachelor's in CS because I don't intend to get a PhD in CS. A PhD would help me get a job teaching at a uni, and those are just about the only benefit for 4-7 years of hard work. If I really wanted to teach, I wouldn't teach at a uni, I would teach somewhere online.

What's the point of teaching at a place that causes non-forgivable student debt and massive risk to the student? That's because online study can optimally be free through your public library. The aim of unschooling is to be extremely frugal, and I am an unschooling advocate. I'd rather work at a nonprofit that exploits modern internet technology to increase its educational reach for free, a la Khan Academy. If you don't know that much about unschooling, I highly suggest you read Llewellyn's book. Its target audience is youth, but its advice about how to implement your own education is priceless. Unschooling isn't easy, but the internet makes it much easier, and studying unschooling will help you be successful in the immediate now but also for the extended future. OER didn't exist back when Llewellyn wrote Teenage Liberation Handbook, but incorporating those into the unschooling curriculum helps immensely in making it affordable. Everything being invented as Open Education is complementary to unschooling, it's almost as if they are the same thing: OER is made for unschooling. It'd be a shame to not agree with this observation and continue to pay tuition just as an insurance or emergency plan b. Obviously do so if you've found cheap tuition at a public university. But most likely you won't find that, because it is going extinct. You must modify your plan of attack and use cheap online education as a plan c, such as University of the People. It's unfortunate but if you're well read about unschooling you might even get excited about online learning. As a computer scientist, you will be on your computer when you learn anyway, so you might as well splitscreen your text editor with an OER PDF or a Lynda video. A lot of online learning gets a bad rap because people don't want to be on their computer any more than they have to. But you have to be on a computer to input your code in an editor, so the complaint is moot. This is like a fundamental law of computer science education. You're forced to be on your computer to study, so why not study using a computer-based source such as OER or your public library video library instead of an expensive textbook?

Another question is whether inexpensive online schooling is coterminous with unschooling, and I would promote that it is. UoPeople is a great way to score a bachelor's degree in computer science for very low costs, and I think the independence that is required to succeed at online schooling is the same as the self-motivation needed to succeed at unschooling. The question is whether you are going to go above and beyond the minimum requirement for the assignment and continue to study extra OER when you are done and still have hours in the day left. To succeed in CS you need to work on it everyday, all day, for four years. Fortunately there are a ton of free open education resources for computer scientists, and I highly recommend you work ahead in your studies instead of stopping your studying when you are done with the assignment. Reading ahead in the book and completing problem sets from future chapters is a great way to certify that you are going to pass your classes with flying colors. The quicker you get done with the rudimentary stuff, the faster you can move on to the difficult subjects in which, if you master while you are unemployed and have the free time to study, you can find employment. Unschooling to me means that you study outside of your homework, that you find learning almost like a hobby and treat it as an occupation that fills your free time from when you wake up to when you go to sleep. Being a little obsessive about learning CS before your first job ensures that when you do find employment, you will be advanced enough in your skills to contribute to the team. I find unschooling allows you to break away from the concept of homework and, in the beneficial circumstance you find yourself with free time after completing your homework, provides the motivation to keep your studying more advanced topics (and finish reading a book before you're supposed to) in order to keep your progress as fast as possible. Wanting to learn computer science should be all the drive necessary to keep you unschooling CS as fast as possible. In fact, unschooling is a good after-work hobby for when you've completed your homework, but want to study a second language or learn a new framework with the current language you're studying. You can keep unschooling separate from your class/homework time, but at the point in which your obsessive drive to unschool in CS pays off by making you a master of your homework because you're so much more advanced than the minimum expectations for a student at that point in the semester, you'll truly see how unschooling benefits traditional schooling. UoPeople is a good experiment if you are interested in unschooling after reading Llewellyn's book. It's a good way to implement unschooling while still ultimately getting the reward of a degree, even if it's not regionally accredited.

I want to emphasize that in promoting unschooling, I am not saying that college is uncool. If you get a scholarship to go to a university somewhere for dirt cheap, you should go. But college is really expensive, and if you want to be frugal and not go in debt, then unschooling is a good mindset to adopt. In some sense computer science is the same everywhere, there isn't much derivation in course material between public universities and private universities (just in work load), so if you find a cheap public university you can make a really frugal choice to study at public school (perhaps even on scholarship) and still come out a competent computer scientist. But a lot of computer science is also self-study. You aren't going to learn JavaScript at university. You aren't going to learn full stack. So if you are interested in those topics you'll have to self-study in your free time. I want to remind you that it is my prediction that, in the future, you will be able to go to online college and get a accredited bachelor's degree for free through your local public library. But that is not the case at the moment, which makes getting a degree for cheap through a public university or community college a really sensible and frugal choice. The meta-phenomenon of this future prediction is cheap online learning sites like Treehouse and cheap online degrees like UoPeople that compete for cheap prices. In time these will merge with your public library to provide accredited computer science degrees for free. This should make you much more confident in choosing unschooling. People will mention what public library they studied at in their future resumes. If you take the approach, that I promote, to study CS extensively through your public library, you will find that the resources to learn CS are free. If you trust me that public libraries will provide free computer science online degrees in the future, if you can't afford public university (for example, there isn't a college in your hometown and paying for rent to live in a different city to attend is too daunting), then online learning/open education concomitant with full-throttled use of your public library is a very safe bet for getting what you're after as a computer scientist. If you approach life-long learning as others approach unschooling, you will see the benefit of being frugal early in your life and avoiding going into debt for student loans. You will see that online learning of computer science (and only computer science, this isn't true for other disciplines) is a very legitimate source of self-education. Given the extent of free OpenCourseWare video playlists and OER, you can learn CS for free, and employers are just going to have to deal with it if they want to hire programmers. The ball is in your court as a self-educating online learner, that is to say. Expensive colleges do not have the upper hand in this battle of private schools versus public libraries. Public libraries will expand their educational offerings and scope in combination with new and improved OER, and soon you might even wind up with a CS degree paid for by your public library. This reality will cause a paradigm shift in hiring practices by companies. The question is, do you wait it out, or do you act as an early adopter and start learning exclusively at the public library now? That is a choice only you can make, but by reading books like The Teenage Liberation Handbook, perhaps you can discover the happiness that awaits self-education outside the confines of student debt and loans and tuition.