---
date: "2018-09-21"
title: "A Liberal Arts Degree is a Telephone Operator's Degree: Liberal Arts Degrees in the Future Will Be Computer Science Degrees"
---

Reading classical literature and books for four years isn't work, it's a past-time. And going to college to study liberal arts isn't something that will provide you financial security in life. Reading classical literature for four years isn't much different than playing video games for four years. They're both hobbies, not work or job education, so I wonder why people are willing to pay money to study liberal arts. I would only study liberal arts if someone paid me to do it. People spend $60,000 a year to get a liberal arts degree and then wonder why they can't score anything more than a retail job while being saddled with $200,000 in student loans. Again, you should only study liberal arts if you are getting paid to do it. You can essentially read whatever liberal arts book is considered the core curriculum in the humanities for free via the public library. You don't have to pay textbook fees, and you don't have to pay tuition. The idea that humanities classroom discussions are worth tens of thousands of dollars a year is pretty outdated with the modern world. Reading is a hobby, and if you think people are going to pay you to read books, you are optimistic. People won't pay you to play video games. And people aren't going to pay you to read classical literature. You can verify this by asking yourself the simple question: Would _you_ pay someone to read a book? Would you willingly give someone a $20 bill as a motivation for him to read some Jane Austen? Probably not. And similarly neither will anyone else in the real world outside of academia pay you for reading books. It's because reading books is play, it's self entertainment. People are addicted to reading books and they're gullible enough to believe that just because they love to read books, enough to pay tens of thousands of dollars a year to be assigned certain readings, that people beyond college will be willing to invest in reading. But there is no investment in reading literature. Reading is something someone does for pleasure, not for career advancement. That's because reading isn't a job unless it's reading something to learn an employable skill. Reading for fun isn't an employable skill.  Real jobs take a lot of hard work and training. They invent new things and technology. No one's ever created new technology through reading classical literature. The liberal arts degree was a symptom of a more innocent time, back when college didn't exploit the finances of students quite so drastically and dedicating a few years to reading didn't condemn you to lifelong poverty. Those days are over, and if you aren't getting paid to read books, you have no argument for paying someone else to command you to read more books.

The return on investment of a liberal arts degree is in the negative. I'm not sure why anyone would invest in an investment that had negative returns. But that's what a liberal arts degree is. It will steal all your money while leaving you without any job options. Of course, they'll tell you the job opportunities come with a more advanced liberal arts degree, so that all you need to do is invest more money into this "investment" so that you can get a job. But the fact that you couldn't get a job with an undergraduate degree in liberal arts just proves that you won't get a job with an advanced degree either. Computer scientists do not struggle to find non-minimum wage jobs after they leave school with a bachelor's degree. That's because they have spent four years learning something useful for employment. They have worked hard and haven't wasted their time reading the classics (i.e. playing video games "with paper"). I'm not saying reading the classics isn't a good thing. I love reading books. I just wouldn't pay anyone for the privilege of reading books and expect to get my money back on that investment. There simply isn't any reality to a job where you are paid to read literature. I wouldn't sink 100% of four years into just this one investment -- reading literature -- instead of diversifying my portfolio and learning a substantial amount of STEM. Because spending money on education is an investment -- you should earn more as a result of your training than you initially put in -- you shouldn't invest in things with negative return on investment. A liberal arts degree is a negative return on investment. Trust me. Nothing that you learn in school reading books is something you couldn't learn for free reading those same books from your public library for free. The idea that you should pay for the privilege of reading books for four years is silly. No one is going to be so amazed at your ability to read books that they'll offer you a cushy job. That's a pipedream, and one that keeps liberal arts colleges in business. You aren't an amazing reader (even if you consider yourself gifted) that will get paid to read literature. Just like you wouldn't pay someone to read a book, no one is going to pay you to read fiction.

You might think I'm being reductionist here, but honestly let me tell you I am professing this criticism of a liberal arts degree from personal experience. I was an art history major in college and experienced six years of unemployment after graduating a few months before the 2008 recession started. There were other factors, like being diagnosed with a mental illness that required a few years to sort itself out, but the underlying experience of having a liberal arts degree has been exceedingly negative for me. In fact, getting an art history degree is one of my biggest regrets in life. I never should have foregone a science degree for an art degree, nothing in my life has contributed to unhappiness more than that decision. My rationale for getting an art history degree was that I would enjoy working in a museum for the rest of my life. However, I soon discovered as soon as I got an art history bachelor's degree that working in a museum position required a master's degree. Of course, the critical theory we studied in school was so meaningless and relativistic that I totally failed to grok it, and so my grades were terrible in art history because I would write essays about how art was inspired by science and my professors wouldn't even understand the basic science concepts I was explaining. Post-modernism in academia is a total plague that will ruin your interest in the liberal arts. Instead of studying and learning about art and art history, I instead learned more about postmodern theorists like Foucault, Lacan, and De Certeau who are complete nihilists and usually get away with stupid analysis (i.e. Foucault criticizing psychiatry and taking an anti-science stance) or utter gibberish that fails meaningful comprehension (Lacan). Foucault is hip in like every discipline in the liberal arts (Sociology, Anthropology, Art History, Philosophy, etc.) and in my opinion his anti-psychiatry falls into anti-science quackery, akin to scientologists. He's one of the stupidest historians I've ever read, but if you don't worship the ground he walks on expect to get some really bad grades in your liberal arts department. Almost all professors in the liberal arts worship at the altar of postmodernism, and if you are the least bit critical of its tendency towards anti-science or relativism you will quickly be ostracized in your department. Postmodernism and literary theory has made liberal arts at college the most stupid, useless, overpriced, and completely non-relevant to your interest in the topic at hand. If you hate postmodernism, you are shit out of luck when it comes to studying at college. The professors defend their territory like soldiers when it comes to hiring colleagues, and they only hire other postmodernists. And they only let students who are also postmodernists succeed in their classes. If you are at all interested in the topic at hand, such as art history, your classes will deal 1% with art and 99% with postmodernism. You won't learn anything about art history, instead you'll just read mentally ill postmodernists who belong more in the psych ward than in college classrooms. You'll wonder why school is so hard when you are reading books that make no god damn sense because the author writes in word salads (i.e. Judith Butler) with completely irrelevance to your interests, only to promote some useless relativism that you suspect ultimately is just passive aggressiveness towards science. You'll suffer through classes and flunk most of them while kids who can't even do calculus get into all the prestigious grad schools. The correlation is: the more you know about science, the worst you'll do in college if you study the liberal arts. If you need proof of this, just read "Higher Superstition" by Gross and Levitt.

Now that the paragraph on personal experience is over, let me emphasize that there is hope if you are interested in the liberal arts. Computer science is a great field for people interested in the liberal arts. If you are interested in art and design, for example, learning front-end web development (hell, even full-stack) is a great way to start a career in art while studying a STEM field. You can learn processing if you are interested in studio art, wherein you can make some impressive artistic productions that rely on programming and code instead of purely paint and brushes. Just as Steve Jobs said, every liberal artist should learn how to code. I would push this even further and say that if you are interested in liberal arts, you should major in computer science in college because that's where you're creating the art and books and magazines and literature of the future. To know how to code allows you to contribute to the evolving shape of the liberal arts in a job that can compliment your interests. If you dedicate yourself to studying computer science and getting a computer science degree, you'll open much more opportunities to work in the liberal arts than if you just studied the liberal arts alone. And you won't have to worry about being assigned those gibberish postmodern literary theory books as your primary source of study. Instead you'll learn how to code, so that you can create the technology that allows consumers to interact with art and literature in the future (instead of digging your head into the sand and relying on the past). I studied letterpress in my studio art classes, for example, and it has directly helped me as a front end web developer. While it was interesting, I think I would have been better served studying front end web development by itself instead of letterpress. If I had learned JavaScript in school, I could have translated that into much more expansive studio art output such as learning processing. Even better, if I had learned C++ in college, I could have contributed to open source art technologies like PureData or other linux programs. If you are serious about studying the liberal arts, the first semester of college the most important thing you can learn to do is to program C++ and JavaScript. Nothing will better enhance your study of art. Trust me, as a liberal arts major, the one thing that was lacking in my life that would have greatly improved my efforts in the liberal arts would have been the ability to code in C++. If you are not creating the open source technology that artists will use in the future, then you are not contributing to art. Learning how to program is the most significant contribution to the arts that you can make in your studies. It even helps out in music, etc. Art in the future will be programming. Avoid majoring in the liberal arts if you are truly interested in the liberal arts, and instead major in computer science. You won't wind up unemployed with student debt at the end of four long years studying Foucault, Butler, Lacan, Derrida, De Certeau, Deleuze and Guattari, and other authors who seriously don't even know how to write coherently let alone make a comprehensible argument. Literary theory is the bastion of conartists and quacks who make their life in a little shell of academia, writing books like it was going out of style all while promoting conspiracy theory-level shit about science and promoting relativism that doesn't believe in truth or objectivity. It's the ultimate waste of time, and if you don't want to waste four years of your life reading crap from dead white literary theorists, then good luck if you pursue the liberal arts in college. Liberal artists of the future will get computer science degrees and contribute to open source software that makes the art and websites of the future.

If you don't believe me and thing I'm just jaded because of my bad experience in a liberal arts department, then you can go ahead and major in the liberal arts. But trust me, you are better off just googling syllabus of liberal arts classes at good private colleges and reading the assigned readings on your own time, free through interlibrary loans from the public library. You should not pay to study good art, because you won't make any money from your studies. You're simply pursuing a hobby, like playing video games, and it won't help you get a job. Study liberal arts for free via your public library and get a University of the People computer science bachelor's degree for $4000. You can read humanities texts in your free time. You should for sure learn to code, at which point you might as well ask yourself if coding is so important to a liberal arts degree, why not just major in computer science? Perhaps you are wedded to the idea of having a liberal arts degree. I tell you, when you are 25 and discover that the jobs that are directly related to art and literature are programming jobs, you'll wonder why you ever majored in liberal arts instead of learning full stack web development or open source software engineering. When the only good art being made is being created digitally using software, and you don't know how to get a job working at the companies making the software, you'll wonder why you were so stubborn and insisted on a liberal arts degree that can't get you a job instead of a CS degree that can. If you are a liberal artist, you can see the importance of diversifying your portfolio and sacrificing some liberal arts classes for the security of less risky investments like STEM classes and CS classes. You'll find if you focus less on liberal arts classes, you'll avoid most of the "advanced" liberal art studies that rely on literary theory authors and postmodernists. You'll come out ahead if you avoid postmodernism, and instead devote your free time to studying how to program. Whenever you are assigned a postmodern text in a liberal arts class, go on strike and refuse to read it. Take the time you would have spent reading that relativistic garbage that just promotes a disbelief in truth and instead study C++. You'll discover the true crime behind academia: and that's the fact that most upper level classes (hell, even lower level classes) are just pushing the postmodernism down everyone's throat. At which point you'll realize you might as well just stop doing your assigned reading in liberal arts and instead just study C++. At which point, the keen ones among you will realize it will be more valuable to just go ahead and get a computer science degree and keep the studying of art and literature as a side hobby. The benefit is that there is not major more facilitative to work in the liberal arts than a computer science degree. If you don't understand this yet, you need to do some serious study about the future of art and books in general. Knowing how to program is the same as being a contributing member to the future of the liberal arts. The postmodernism that infuses every niche in academia is a invasive weed that will suffocate the happiness of students whose throats literary theory is forced down. It's unavoidable, at which point is it easier just to admit defeat, and instead of spending tens of thousands of dollars studying liberal arts at college, just spend $4000 on a UofPeople degree and become a computer scientist through Open Educational Resources. If you are a science-loving artist, you'll find yourself quickly stamped out at college if you pursue the liberal arts. Postmodernism is a disease that suffuses 100% of liberal arts classes in college. You can be naive and think I'm exaggerating, but as someone that has spent $60,000 getting an art history degree from a private college, I can promise you I am not lying and you'll suffer through four years of excruciating nihilistic relativism and anti-science disguised as "post-colonialism" if you study the liberal arts at university. Just read some books by Alan Sokal for a taste of the gibberish that's on the syllabi at colleges. You'll get horrible grades because you don't write incomprehensible essays on literary theory, at which point you'll be excluded from graduate school and you'll never get that museum job you wanted in the first place. It's a total waste of time and money. Considering you can study CS for free online through OER (you can't study liberal arts through OER to nearly the same degree -- that should tell you all you need to know about liberal arts professors and what their values are), the potential savings are immense. You could not only get a job if you studied computer science, instead of spending your lifetime working retail or as a barista, you might actually contribute to the field you had an interest in in the first place -- art! history! anthropology! sociology! literature! If you think computer science doesn't have anything to offer to these fields, then you need to read up on the power of computer science and what it does. In my opinion, not only is computer science going to be the first degree that you can get online for free through your public library, you'll also see liberal arts majors shut down at colleges first. Your choices are obvious: are you going to major in a field that will no longer be offered at colleges in the future, or are you going to major in the successor to these degrees, computer science, and combine your interest in the humanities with the ability to program computers (these new inventions first made sixty years ago that actually facilitate the study of your favorite humanities field by making free websites, free books, inexpensive tablet computers, free digital ebooks, free digital music, streaming video, etc). Major in the successor to these humanities degrees: computer science, for a lot less money too! And you won't have to read postmodern cult crap. You'll probably be more posed to contribute to the humanities as a computer scientist than as, say, a barista. And if you think you're going to become a humanities professor, good luck! You'll need hundreds of thousands of dollars (i.e. a trust fund in your name) and a unending love of postmodernism! If you like science instead of white male "theorists", though, let alone aren't a trustafarian, you'll be sorely out of luck! You'll probably never make it as a professor in the modern humanities department. This is actually a blessing if you're not a cult member of the church of postmodernism, and the sooner you get out of the humanities academia cult the happier your life can be. You can mend the tens of thousand dollars you wasted and perhaps even go back to school to earn a STEM degree at a local public school for a fraction of the cost of what you spent in the humanities department. It's a bitter pill to swallow, but an important part of growing up and becoming an adult, not someone stuck in perpetual childhood (reading literary theorists and being a resentful Marxist or something ridiculous). If you think I am making stuff up, I honestly promise you that as an art history major in college I read more about Marx and Marxists in my assigned readings than I did about art. It was the biggest waste of time and money and makes me want to cry when I think of all the effort wasted on outright lies. Fortunately, no one had even heard of Foucault when I went back to school to study computer science. That's awesome! I don't have to feel like I'm a secret fascist because I think psychiatry and psychiatric medicines are awesome and get bad grades because I can't write meaningless essays about how important biopolitics are. Sorry, #teamscience here.

Some of you might feel this essay is a little off topic, because it's about the liberal arts instead of computer science. If you are a scientist and have never heard of literary theory, or wouldn't ever waste your time reading a Marxist, then consider yourself lucky. If you are a person that is interested in the humanities and are considering a liberal arts major in college, I am writing about my personal experience to truthfully tell you that you are better off studying computer science if you are interested in art or literature. The humanities in college is a joke and a complete waste of time and money. You'll be happier studying computer science and reading hum books in your free time. Computer science professors are on your team, while humanities professors will actively work against you to destroy your career. I'm telling you the truth, either believe me or not. There is something seriously wrong about humanities professors. I think they are a bit brainwashed and are afraid of thinking critically or outside of professor-orthodoxy, so they never dare tread in non-Marxist waters. It's just literary theorist after literary theorist. Imagine investing so much of your time into lies and hot air, building entire careers off of it, wouldn't you be a little defensive when someone points out that the continental philosopher isn't even comprehensible? What they do is call you stupid, and say that you're too dumb to understand "advanced" philsophy. Well, that's their problem if their beloved philosopher is too difficult to understand. Don't believe their accusations that you are too dumb to be a professor in the humanities, let's even just assume that perhaps you are. Just laugh at their pathetic lives and go on to be a happy computer scientist, making awesome technology that improves lives and that people love and trust. You'll avoid this pathetic little cult that thrives in the dark halls of academia and lives to tell more moderate students that they're just too dumb to "get" it.

Best of luck, humanities-ophiles.

Addendum:

I have been learning about personal finance a lot lately, and I wrote this essay because I think it is very peculiar that students at liberal arts colleges never learn about personal finance, because the humanities curriculum teaches nothing about it. Here is a system that takes up the important years of your life when you are employable and you should be socking away money for the benefits of compound interest over decades, in order to stress less in later life. The only salary benefit to having a liberal arts degree is if you work yourself in academia. That's a high risk for an investment. As you may or may not know, there are fewer and fewer tenured positions in the liberal arts; most schools are converting to relying on adjunct professors. Under this system, teachers make the profit off university study, not the students themselves. The cost of teaching a student to be a professor in the university system should equal the the benefit to the student -- a 1 student to 1 professor ratio. That is, when a teacher retires, they should train exactly one student to take their place. In university with tenure, that means one student should be trained in the liberal arts for the once-in-a-lifetime situation that a tenure professor retires. Anything more than a one to one ratio is exploitative. I forgot the exact ratio of this, but it's nothing near one. There are usually tens of grad students who graduate each year with a PhD, for these once-in-a-lifetime positions. Anything more than a one to one ratio means something is awry and foul in the state of Denmark. The success of teachers actually depends on the competitiveness between PhD graduates. The more ultra competitive for PhD students to get university jobs, the more money tenured professors make. The more PhD students suffer, the more tenured faculty benefit. In my opinion professors should be obligated to term limits, like politicians.

Public services like public schools are directly harmed the more people and PhD candidates buy into private colleges. The fact that public universities departments only hire faculty from elite private universities mean that the professors themselves are trying to exploit the system for financial gain, or utterly clueless about the exploitation behind the system if you're optimistic. Think about -- shouldn't there be a law in place that public universities can only hire professors that graduated from public universities? Personally I think there should be and it advocate for that myself. To do otherwise is like hiring the board members of Nickelodeon to program the future of PBS kids. Public services like PBS and NPR and public universities are awesome, and commercial free. Do you want your kids watching PBS kids or nickelodeon? Do you want your kids to go to public university or a private liberal arts college? Come on, nickelodeon is so much more _fun_.

Liberal arts colleges exploit uprooted kids who like to read books by removing them from their family circle in vital years when mental illness arises and your family needs to observe you for irregularities in mood. In my opinion, it is no coincidence that college begins at the same age as mental illness has its onset (18 years old). I am not a conspiracy theorist, but as someone with a mental illness (schizophrenia), I am amazed that I was removed from my community and displaced to an entirely different city and state the same year I had the onset of my mental illness. I think private colleges have exploited this for a long time. Mentally ill 18 year olds are more willing to separate from their families or even turn on them and view them as enemies, devote themselves to ideology instead of diversity of thought, and have zero reliability on their childhood social networks that aren't academia-based. Once we as a society see mental illness as a spectrum, we'll observe that all students are vulnerable to the liberal arts private colleges. People have known about schizophrenia and bipolar since we were probably hominids, so it is certainly intriguing that society has engendered a form of "student education" that separates kids from their parents the same year as the onset of mental illness. There is no support for students with mental illness at liberal arts colleges, I can report from experience. No one will observe your unusual behavior (they'll just attribute it to drugs or drinking if you aren't straight edge (which you should be)). Professors are only looking out for numero uno, and so are students who go to private liberal arts colleges, to see how much money they can earn off this "elite" education. It is pure exploitation of the genetics of mental illness, and in my opinion private liberal arts colleges profit from students' collective suffering.

If you're skeptical, just look at the authors liberal arts colleges stuff down the throats of their undergraduate humanists: the anti-psychiatry of Foucault, the anti-psychiatry of Lacan, the "Capitalism and Schizophrenia" anti-psychiatry of Deleuze and Guattari. These people are the superstars of private liberal arts humanities department, and it is hopeless in my opinion. Get a computer science degree from your public library.

