---
date: "2019-03-18"
title: "Tips for Personal Finance"
ghissue: 66
---

I wrote this for my team wiki's "Quality of Life" topic, and I thought I'd cross post it here. Enjoy:

Since Tegan reorganized our wiki yesterday and we now have a “Quality of Life Tips” category, I want to share with the team what I’ve learned in the past year studying Personal Finance and how that relates to working in a tech career, especially a job in the FinTech industry. If you agree with the ideas, the principles can maybe help guide you as a FinTech employee and perhaps steer our development of new products and services. I think having a strong grasp of Personal Finance is important if you work in the FinTech industry because if you are a master of your personal finances you have an omni-level understanding of what is necessary in order to generate wealth for yourself. If you take what you learn in knowing how to generate personal wealth, then you can package that up into products which meet the goals of our customers, which is also to generate personal wealth for themselves. Personal finance is a hard subject, I’m not going to lie, and even the smartest of developers can make mistakes in the personal finance realm which stalls their retirement or affects their quality of life. Basically it’s kind of like homework, you just gotta get out there and read books. I find studying Personal Finance to be fascinating, however, and have taken to it like an acolyte. I’m usually reading a book about index funds or financial independence on the weekend (John Bogle has like 10 books I’m trying to get through and I’m nearly done reading every book on r/financialindependence’s reading list at https://www.reddit.com/r/financialindependence/wiki/books).  I need to get back to studying programming on the weekends, haha. I hope I can share with you in this blog post ideas for your own study and use. 

# tl;dr
Buy a total stock market index fund and total bond market index fund as much as you can and as frequently as you can by maxing out your pre-tax 401K, IRA, and HSA contributions, and put any leftover savings in a post-tax investment account. Buy and hold forever. Vanguard indexes are cheapest. Fund performance is linked to the inexpensiveness of its expense ratio over many decades. Increase your savings rate as high as possible (50%+) while still young to earn compound growth for decades more than usual and push forward your retirement date. Since it’s easier to control your savings rate than it is your market return rate, frugality goes a long way to growing your investments. Cut costs and earn more.

# The Basics: Index Funds
I’m going to start off by talking about index funds. People might have heard about them and seen them on their 401K selection list, but I myself up until last year didn’t realize how important they are as a bedrock for someone’s personal finance. The way they work is this: Instead of relying on a mutual fund manager (who picks stocks, buys and sells holdings, and follows the market), an index fund relies on computers to decide which stocks to buy and sell. The index is basically a cut off point for purchasing: If a stock falls below a certain threshold for value (i.e. its value falls to nothing), the computer indicates that the index fund should sell the stock and not purchase any more of that stock. If a stock’s value rises above that threshold (i.e. it goes from nothing to having value), it is purchased by the index fund. This can be completely automated by computer, at which point a mutual fund manager’s “expertise” in choosing stocks isn’t required and as a result doesn’t have to be paid for. Paying for a mutual fund manager’s expertise is expensive, and its costs are shuffled downwards to the mutual fund purchasers in the form of high expense ratios. Since an index fund is automated, there is no cost which is paid for by the purchasers. So, index funds can have an expense ratio in the hundredths of a percent, while actively managed mutual funds have expense ratios tens of times higher. For example, on our 401K the Vanguard S&P500 index offered on our plan has an expense ratio of 0.04%, while the other actively managed mutual funds have expense ratios of 0.7% or higher.

That might seem negligible, after all what is the difference between 0.04% and 0.7% in terms of the amount of money invested in your 401K? But the way expense ratios work is deceptively not innocuous. The expense ratio comes off from your earning. Let’s say the stock market returns 7% for a year. An e/r of 1% would only return a growth of 6%, while an index fund would return 6.96% for the year. In terms of compound interest, this is a huge difference. When 1% e/r is compounded for thirty years, that 1% e/r turns out siphoning off earnings of hundreds of thousands of dollars. If you had invested in an index fund, you would have hundreds of thousands of dollars more in your retirement account.

For visualizations about how high expense ratios cut into your earnings, check out this hour-long Frontline called “The Retirement Gamble”: https://www.pbs.org/video/frontline-retirement-gamble/ If you’re new to what an index fund is, it is a very valuable episode. It also features Jack Bogle, who is a very cool dude who invented the first index fund (based on the S&P 500) in 1976.

Now, you might object to the fact that that higher expense ratio bites into your earnings by arguing that actively managed mutual funds earn more than passively managed mutual funds. While that is sometimes true, it turns out to be the exception rather than the rule in regards to actively managed funds outperforming the market. The S&P500, for example, buys stock in the largest 500 stocks in the market. VTSAX, Vanguard’s total stock market index fund (or any total stock market index fund), for example, buys every stock in the market above a certain value threshold and attempts to hold every stock publically traded. These broad-based holdings of stocks in index funds results in the index fund basically tracking the performance of the market: The earnings of the market are essentially the earnings of the index fund. Actively managed funds’ single goal is to outperform the market: that’s the premium for which you are paying a higher expense ratio. But most actively managed mutual funds don’t outperform the index: roughly 75% of actively managed mutual funds don’t outperform the index. The problem with using actively managed mutual funds for your retirement strategy is the difficulty in choosing the winner versus choosing the loser: sometimes it is just pure luck. Even those that outperform the index usually don’t do so by a vast amount, and the higher expense ratios bite into the earnings. It’s also nearly impossible for a successful actively managed mutual fund to keep up that performance for the long-term (and remember, the goal of investing is to hold mutual funds for 30+ years so you can benefit from compound earnings). When you look at actively managed mutual funds for the long term rather than year by year, most don’t outperform the index. In fact, when you factor in costs and higher taxes for active trading, they underperform the index. Even those that have good years among that 30 year timeline. It’s very difficult to outperform the market for any long term amount. People still hope that their mutual fund manager will, however, and so as a result invest actively instead of passively. Even though if they had invested in an index fund instead, they would have higher earnings at the end of the thirty years. Sometimes this difference can be hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Here are some common index funds:

Total Stock Market Index – ex: Vanguard VTSAX, Fidelity FSKAX. Holds every stock in the market. Low expense ratio and also covers some small and mid cap as opposed an S&P500 index which is just large cap. Ultimately the difference in earnings between a total stock market index and a S&P500 index is negligible over thirty+ years.
S&P500 index – ex: Vanguard VFIAX, Fidelity FXAIX. Usually every 401k offers such an index fund, but unfortunately sometimes it’s the only one offered. If your plan also offers a mid and small cap index fund (SE2 does), you can simulate a total stock market fund by buying 81% large cap, 6% mid cap, and 13% small cap. A good expense ratio is 0.04$ like SE2’s is, a bad expense ratio is .5%+. A S&P500 index covers about 75% of the total stock market, whereas a total stock market index covers 100% (but those small cap companies have smaller returns, so the difference over thirty+ years between VTSAX and VFIAX becomes negligible).

This is all a summary of what I’ve learned regarding index funds, but you can read primary sources re: the outperformance of passive investing versus active investing in Jack Bogle’s “Little Book of Common Sense Investing: The Only Way to Guarantee Your Fair Share of Stock Market Returns” (2017, audiobook of 2007 edition: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TNvbBvzelCY ). A good, quick Planet Money episode is “Brilliant vs. Boring,” which discusses Warren Buffet’s 10-year $1 million bet that VFIAX (Vanguard S&P500 Index) would outperform any active hedge fund manager: https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2019/01/23/688018907/episode-688-brilliant-vs-boring A short podcast series on index funds is NPR LifeKit’s “Secrets of Saving And Investing” (https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510330/secrets-of-saving-and-investing)

So the conclusion many have come to is that index funds are the best investment vehicle for your retirement. After factoring in costs, they outperform actively managed mutual funds due to their low costs and broad holdings which track the market as a whole. It’s somewhat unintuitive that a computer-controlled index can outperform the wisest in the investment industry, but the history of the past forty years points to a clear winner: buy and hold the entire stock market instead of individual stocks. The three factors that determine how much you earn in your investing are: 1) how much you invest 2) the length of time you invest and 3) your returns/earnings. Most people chase the third element, paying more and more for each additional percentage instead of just investing in a total stock market index fund, when it could be that the easiest factor to adjust is the first one, by living frugally and saving as much as you can each and every year, or else the second one, by maxing out your 401K/IRA as soon as you enter the workforce at age 22 and sustaining that for as long as possible until you meet your retirement goals. I’ll talk more about these two factors in the next section.

# How to Retire?
I have been tracking a personal finance strategy the past year called “financial independence” since learning about it two years ago. The jist of it is to try to reduce cost of living as much as possible by living frugally, and to invest your saved money heavily into your retirement at a young age in order to benefit from compound interest for as many decades as possible. The rule of 72 says that the number of years to double your investment is 72 divided by your earnings. A stock market return of 8%, for example, would result in the doubling of your money every 9 years. This means that if you have 9 more years of time to earn compound interest by investing early in your retirement in your career, starting the decade earlier potentially could double your final retirement amount versus if you had waited a decade to start saving for retirement. Financial independence is the point in your life when your savings earn enough money in a year to pay for your cost of living. The main strategy behind this goal is to minimize cost of living while maximizing your saving rate, aiming for something above 50% if not more. Obviously the lower the cost of your yearly living expenses, the less you will have to have saved in mutual funds for their earnings to cover your expenses and the earlier you can stop working if you so choose.

Say you live frugally and max out your 401K and traditional IRA from the age you started working, 22. Doing this for a decade would result in you having $250,000 in your retirement by the age of 32 (maximum contribution for a 401K is $19000 a year, and an IRA is $6000). That is basically enough money for a comfortable retirement already. Since you can’t withdrawl your retirement until you’re 59.5 years old, that $250,000 will compound tax-free for 30 years, resulting in a final amount of $1.9 million assuming a 7% market return. Another important notion in financial independence is the 4% rule: that a safe withdrawl rate at retirement is 4% in order to protect your nest egg for many decades (https://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2012/05/29/how-much-do-i-need-for-retirement/) Ignoring the details of the 4% rule for the moment, a $1.9 million retirement at 4% withdrawl would allow for a yearly income of $76,000 a year. That’s a hearty sum-- although you have to plan for inflation after 30 years-- but all you did was max out your 401K and IRA for a decade when you started working, which is very feasible. At age 32, you were basically done investing in your retirement and could put all the rest of your earnings from age 32 on in other non-age-linked investment vehicles. That’s why financial independence is usually combined with the notion of early retirement into the acronym FIRE (financial independence, early retirement). If you maxed out your 401K and IRA from ages 22-32 and continued to invest in index funds in an “after tax account” (as opposed to a pre-tax account like the 401K and IRA) from age 22 on, you could basically reach the point where you are earning enough in your post-tax investment account by age 40 or so that you could live off the returns of your post-tax account up until you reach age 60, when you can dip into your 401K and IRA. So you could retire at 40. Obviously this is an extreme goal and not everyone desires early retirement, but I’m just offering it up as an example of what’s possible if you start saving a high percentage of your salary at a young age by living frugally and investing in index funds in your pre- and post-tax accounts. In summary, “FIRE” is a retirement strategy that involves extreme levels of saving at an early age in your working career that enables you to become financially independent as soon as possible so that you can retire at will. You can research more about this on the internet if this sounds interesting to you. A good blog concerning it and outlining strategies for living frugally and saving high is http://mrmoneymustache.com.

So, the “order of operations” for financial independence is something like this:

First, pay off all debt. Getting rid of interest rates on debt is the same as earning the equivalent interest rate in the stock market. A good book on getting out of debt is Dave Ramsey’s Total Money Makeover, or Jerrold Mundis’s How to Get Out of Debt, Stay Out of Debt, and Live Prosperously. A quick audio podcast is NPR’s LifeKit: Get Out of Debt (https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510335/get-out-of-debt)

Second, save up an emergency fund. A emergency fund is a highly liquid account (i.e. a bank account or money market mutual fund) which you can easily convert into cash for an emergency, car wreck/trouble, or medical expenses. A safe amount is usually six month’s worth of expenses.

Next, maximize your 401k each year. The limit on 401K contribution is currently $19,000 a year. 401Ks are pre-tax, so they lower your adjusted marginal tax rate and let you pay lower taxes on your salary. Basically America wants you to have a successful retirement, so there are tax incentives for people who contribute to their retirement. Invest in index funds, and our 401K has some really awesome offerings like S&P500 (large cap), mid-cap index fund, and small-cap index fund. While a S&P500 is usually enough if you aren’t offered a total stock market index fund (returns are similar over the course of 30 years), you can mimic the composition of a total stock market index fund by investing 81% large cap (S&P500 index), 6% mid cap index, and 13% small cap index (source: https://jlcollinsnh.com/2013/05/02/stocks-part-xvii-what-if-you-cant-buy-vtsax-or-even-vanguard/) This is what I’m currently doing on my SE2 401k, and the expense ratio of each of those index is an amazing 0.04-0.05% each. Amazing, thank you SE2. The S&P500 index at my former employer was 0.3 e/r. No bueno.

Next, maximize your IRA. The limit on IRA contributions are currently $6,000 a year. IRAs are pre-tax, so you take off your contribution from your salary each year on your taxes. This again lowers your marginal tax rate, for further benefit. Because you can choose where you set up your IRA, you have the advantage of having more choice in the mutual funds you have at your disposal than with an employer’s 401k, where the mutual funds are preselected. Vanguard is the obvious choice for investing in index funds, since if you have your IRA set up at Vanguard you can invest in the awesome VTSAX total stock market index. Vanguard has the lowest expense ratios of any company in America, because the company was formed to be mutually owned by the actual investors as opposed to beholden to public or private ownership. So decisions are made with the investors in mind. IRAs come in two forms: traditional and Roth. A traditional IRA is pre-tax, with the responsibility of paying taxes upon withdrawl at age 59.5+. Roth IRA are post-tax, and you don’t have to pay taxes upon withdrawing at age 59.5+. While this sounds good, you are essentially limiting your investment by your marginal tax rate (i.e. you pay 15% taxes on your Roth’s $6,000 each year, so you are basically only investing $5100 a year). I go with a traditional IRA but Roth’s are fine, I just expect to have a low tax rate at retirement since I won’t be living the high life then (not that I live the high life now, except in spirit).

Next, maximize your HSA. Your HSA is an investment vehicle if you have a high deductible health plan. I don’t have one and never will, so I’m not totally familiar with HSAs, but you can invest something like $3500 a year pre-tax. If you don’t have medical expenses, which is the goal with a high deductible plan afterall, you basically have a third investment vehicle at your disposal where you can invest in index funds.

Finally, set up a post-tax investment account. The other “buckets” mentioned above are all pre-tax. A post-tax account requires you not only to invest post-tax dollars, but earnings are also taxed. While this sounds bad, it’s really not that bad. Our investment strategy is to buy and hold index funds forever and live off the earnings when we retire (instead of reinvesting them to earn compound earnings), so we won’t have a lot of sales which generate taxable events. The advantage of having a taxable account is that you don’t have to wait until age 59.5 to withdraw. So hypothetically if you save enough in a post-tax account to earn enough to live off of (the general rule, in corollary with the 4% rule is that you require in savings 25 times the amount of your cost of living for a year. So a $25,000 a year cost of living requires a $625,000 egg). The goal here is to save enough in a post-tax account that you can retire when you have enough where you can siphon off the principal plus market earnings for each year’s cost of living to the point where you are 59.5 years old, when you can start withdrawing on your 401k and IRA retirement and it doesn’t matter that your post-tax account is now zero dollars. I chose Vanguard for this, because again I can invest in VTSAX there, but Ben once brought up Robinhood with me one day, which allows you to buy VTI (the VTSAX total stock market ETF equivalent) for free. My concern is that purchasing VTI at Vanguard is free anyway, if you want VTI instead of VTSAX or VFIAX (S&P500 index), and you want a company that will be around in 30 years and I’m not sure the Robinhood app won’t go out of business in that time. Personally I hope that never happens, but app companies are somewhat volatile. I’d say go with Vanguard again, they’ll definitely be around in 40 years. Keep investing in total stock market index funds (VTSAX or the VTI ETF, or else an S&P500 index if unavailable), so that you track the market. Reinvest your earnings while you are still working so you earn compound interest, then switch to having your earnings/dividends from your post-tax account put into your bank account when you do decide to retire.

And that’s basically it. You max out your pre-tax for as long as you can while you are young, and put the rest into post-tax for when you retire early, which hopefully will last you until age 59.5. A summary of this strategy is here: http://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2018/11/29/how-to-retire-forever-on-a-fixed-chunk-of-money/ Again, this is extreme but since compounding is your friend, the earlier in age you max out your 401K/IRA contributions, the more you’ll have in retirement. Having a high savings rate (50% and up) from a young age is a great way to become financially independent very early in life, if that is one of your goals. If your goal isn't early retirement-- perhaps it is being able to contribute to charity/nonprofits or to pass on a sizeable inheritance to your kids-- the tactics of financial independence are still  useful.

# Allocation Strategy
There is another simple principle here: total bond market index is again a better investment that non-index bond funds. Jack Bogle (the founder of Vanguard) talks about it in the book mentioned above (Little Book of Common Sense Investing), but again, in brief, you want to index even bond funds.

Allocation strategies are a little too complex for a wiki, but I will share my allocation strategy (which I admit is rather extreme). During my “wealth acquisition phase”, which corresponds to the years I’m not retired and working, I am allocating 100% in stocks (particularly VTSAX in my IRA and VFIAX + a midcap index and a small-cap index in my 401K) in order to maximize gains when I’m not living off the principal anyway and don’t care about market volatility. When I do retire, I will switch to a 75% VTSAX and a 25% VBTLX (total bond market index fund) allocation. This is the “wealth preservation phase”, with bonds providing cushioning to market volatility. The strategy I follow, outlined at https://jlcollinsnh.com/stock-series/ (which I highly recommend reading even if you aren’t going to go with this strategy just to learn about the market and index funds. A Google talk is here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T71ibcZAX3I ), is focused on simplicity: only two funds (VTSAX and VBTLX), and only reallocating when you aren’t working or retired. The trade-off for simplicity is that you have to have a high tolerance for risk, since your portfolio will be strongly hit by market downturns. The most important thing to keep in mind, even if you aren’t following this strategy, is to never sell during market downturns. Everyone on the news and media will be telling you to sell when the market goes down significantly (sometimes as much as 50%, making your investment shrink by that much as well), but you have to be brave and vigilant and not sell. In fact, you should probably buy more index funds during market turbulence. An important way to conceptualize it is to think of market turns as not being that big of deal in reality, because the market usually recovers after some time (even 2008 took only two years to recover completely), and during those downswings stocks are actually on sale. Purchasing index funds during a market downturn can really improve your holdings, and as long as you don’t sell (you are, after all, buying stocks to hold forever for retirement), and you can find some great deals while everyone else (short-term dealers) are panicking.

Another allocation strategy is retirement target dates. Here you choose your target year of retirement (i.e. 2050) and the fund will automatically allocate bonds vs. equities as the years go by. These are actually a pretty sweet deal, because you basically can set it and forget it. Personally, I like choosing funds and strategizing how to keep expense ratios as low as possible, and reallocation isn’t that big of a deal (usually you only have to do it once a year), so I’ll take the additional earnings by having low expense ratios with index funds (target date funds usually have an expense ratio of .6-.7, whereas index funds have an expense ratio of .04). So I’ll just do it myself and keep the additional earnings. But target date funds are probably the best choice if you don’t know about allocation or don’t want to take the time to track your changes from year to year. I would just rather make sure I am investing in index funds rather than stocks and actively trading. Vanguard has target date funds, which do invest in index funds and as a result have a lower e/r than 401K target funds.

# Automatic Deposits
A great strategy to ensure you invest each month is to set your post-tax investment account (Vanguard does this) to automatically invest each time you receive a pay check. If you are maxing out your 401K, you are depositing each pay period a percentage of your paycheck into your 401K (say 30%). Do this with your post-tax account for whatever leftover amount you can save from your paycheck after substituting costs and deposit this set amount each paycheck to automatically invest in your index funds. The benefit of this is that you’re basically Dollar Cost Averaging, which prevents you from trying to market time (buying low, selling high) which is usually detrimental and counter-productive, since no one can predict the stock market (let alone successfully time the market consistently). When you are buying and holding investments for 30+ years, the day to day market fluctuations in price simple don’t matter and the most important factor is getting as much into the market for as long of time as possible. Automatic deposits again let you expend as little time and energy as possible on this, so that it becomes an afterthought.  Just budget for expenses accordingly and in thirty years you’ll thank yourself for setting up auto deposits instead of trying to do it manually.

# Frugality
There are plenty of books and reddit forums, for example, on living frugally, whether that means cooking cheaply or bringing your lunch/not eating out at restaurants or buying used cars or riding a bike, so you can study frugality tactics there and tailor them to your personal needs and requirements. Frugality is political, since it’s easy to take discussions of frugality as a moral judgment upon oneself since “consumerism” has been so demonized after the 1960's, and feelings can get hurt. So I won’t talk about it here, other than to say it’s important that, in case you start earning a higher salary, for example, not to let “lifestyle creep” flatten your savings rate. If you start earning more, it’s easy to start spending more on more expensive goods and services, but the goal after an increase in your salary should be to maintain the same lifestyle while increasing your savings rate instead. People call this lifestyle creep "hedonic adaptation," whereas more expensive goods only result in a temporary increase in your self-fulfillment, after which you quickly return to the same state as you were before your salary bump. So it's not worth it, essentially, to permit lifestyle creep. Put any bump in salary into savings and maintain the same frugal lifestyle, so that you can achieve your retirement goals earlier, when you can really have fun.

# Summary
Hey, just to be honest, we have a really unique situation that most people don’t have. Developer jobs pay well, but with the salary comes the decision of either living the high life or taking that extra amount and saving it towards retirement. For me, early retirement is really attractive because I have hobbies like art and music and reading that I could really focus on and develop with more time than is permitted with a full time working schedule. So my goal for the next decade is to live as frugally as possible and invest as wisely as possible in order to permit an earlier retirement. It’s an extreme case, but personal finance is important regardless to prepare you for the day you retire. It just so happens that the work necessary for a comfortable retirement is a lot easier (and less expensive) if you do it early in your life thanks to compounding, so this document is simply a gentle push not to sit out a potentially profitable/productive period of your life. Not everyone knows about index funds and Vanguard, but I think we all share the goals of living as comfortably as possible with the least amount of work (and money) required as possible, so I thought I’d share some strategies I picked up reading a lot of personal finance books the past year. If you have any questions or comments or want to share the love of personal finance, hit me up.

I know the other Life Tips write-ups deal with relevant PluralSight courses and such, and although there aren’t any PluralSight courses on financial independence at the time, I do have to say that the reason I got into this topic in the first place was because I was listening to a Treehouse podcast by their founder, who talked about and even interviewed Mr. Money Mustache. Treehouse is the web development training site that the Topeka Public Library subscribes to, which helped me learn modern full-stack web development while a student in CS at Washburn. So while PluralSight has some awesome “Life Tip” courses like Cory House’s “Become an Outlier Programmer,” I’d like to think of Financial Independence as also kind of having a home-town computer science spin because of the Topeka Public Library’s Treehouse subscription. I think being a computer scientist and having a grasp of personal finance, if not even having a goal of financial independence, especially working in the FinTech industry is a match made in heaven.

# Bibliography
NPR LifeKit - Secrets Of Saving And Investing https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510330/secrets-of-saving-and-investing Find Money You Didn't Know You Had https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510331/find-money-you-didnt-know-you-had Get Out Of Debt https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510335/get-out-of-debt

NPR Planet Money - Episode 688: Brilliant Vs. Boring https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2019/01/23/688018907/episode-688-brilliant-vs-boring

If You Can - How Millennials Can Get Rich Slowly https://www.etf.com/docs/IfYouCan.pdf

Mr Money Mustache http://www.mrmoneymustache.com/all-the-posts-since-the-beginning-of-time/

jlcollinsnh – Stock Series https://jlcollinsnh.com/stock-series/  And Google talk: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T71ibcZAX3I

https://www.reddit.com/r/financialindependence/wiki/books

Frontline “The Retirement Gamble”: https://www.pbs.org/video/frontline-retirement-gamble





