---
date: "2018-11-03"
title: "What is Holm Schooling?"
---

In the quest to get a first computer science job while spending as little money as possible, you can completely hack college education to get you to where you want to be. I call these techniques Holm Schooling, because unschooling doesn’t necessarily convey all the little tips and trick I want to teach through this site. Holm Schooling doesn’t mean you’re enrolled at Holm School – there’s no such place – but it means you’re applying a set of principles to maximize the goals of unschooling while not sacrificing the benefits of affordable public education. Let’s explore.

The first technique of Holm Schooling would be to study hard in high school and get good grades, good SAT scores, and earn National Merit Scholarship so that you can go to public university for free. In fact, if you do well enough at High School, the university might actually pay you to attend. But which university should you go to? In my opinion, the definitive answer to that is the public university (including community college) that is in your hometown. Moving out of your hometown is a huge financial burden and one that can sink frugality. In the interest of brevity, I will just emphasize one point: Living in a dorm rather than your family home requires you to subscribe to a board plan for food. You’re forced to purchase food from the university commons. University food is so expensive it should be criminal. Sometimes even if there are frugal options (my college offered beans and rice and spaghetti and sauce for a buck or two), you are still required to purchase a minimum amount of board points. Thus, even if you feed yourself frugally (which you probably won’t be able to), you’re still required to spend all your remaining board credits at the end of the year. I bought a hotplate off ebay my freshman year so that I could cook in the dorms. You shouldn’t need to do this. Living at home and not living in a castle-like dorm can save you thousands of dollars a year. Since I suggest you go to whatever college is in your hometown, that you should live at home instead of living in a dorm is a given. You can cook frugally at home and pack your meals in zip lock bags for microwaving at college (carry a plastic Tupperware bowl in your backpack).

The next suggestion is, if you are paying per credit instead of an annual fee (common in public universities), only take classes in the computer science/math department. This is only if you didn’t receive a scholarship – scholarships usually require a minimum amount of credit hours, so you might as well work towards your bachelors in science degree. But if you are paying per credit hour, just enroll in computer science and math classes. Here’s the suggestion: Take as many computer science classes at community college as you can, then take as many computer science classes at public university (in your hometown) as you can. Don’t worry about anything other than computer science classes and their concomitant requirements. Forget about liberal arts classes or anything other than STEM classes. At the end of four years, you should have enough credits to qualify for a bachelor’s of science degree in computer science. Sometimes this means you’ll only take one to three computer science classes per semester. But since you’ll be focusing only on these two CS classes each semester, you can study above and beyond the basic requirements of the class and pull off an A in each class.
As you take as many computer science classes as you can at the community college/public university in your hometown, living at home, you’ll save money by not taking the requirements for a bachelor’s degree (i.e. public speaking, technical writing, economics, etc.). These things you can study on your own on the internet, it is silly to pay the same amount of money you are paying for a computer science class for “requirements” for a B.S. Once you have taken all the computer science classes (and just computer science/math classes) as you can, you’ll start applying for jobs. If you list all your computer science classes taken on your resume, employers will see that you have completed a computer science degree even though you haven’t taken the requirements for a B.S. At this point, you have Holm Schooled yourself into a first computer science job while spending the minimum amount of money for public university classes.
Once you get your first job (make sure it is a job with tuition reimbursement as a benefit), you can apply to be a student at the University of the People. They accept transfer credit, so you should be able to send your transcript and qualify for most of their CS courses. Instead, you’ll finish out the B.S. requirements for a UoPeople computer science degree. This will be where your B.S. is from, but your hometown university will be where most of your CS classes are accredited. Because your employer offers tuition reimbursement (and you’ll qualified for transfer credit at UoPeople), finishing up your B.S. while you work your first job could cost mere hundreds of dollars. And you won’t need to rush through your remaining online classes, because you are already working and already acquiring experience.

This works if you didn’t receive a scholarship to attend the university in your hometown and are paying a flat fee for each credit hour. Taking only computer science classes is a great way to reduce your work load so that you can study extra hard and get A’s in each of your CS classes, while also not paying for those silly degree requirement classes such as liberal arts classes that are where most of your money is wasted in pursuit of B.S. Stick to CS/Math/STEM classes and you’ll use your tuition dollars most wisely in your quest to get a first programming job.

Notice how I haven’t even mentioned the public library? This is where Holm Schooling gets really interesting. The spine/backboard of Holm Schooling is to take just CS/Math classes at your hometown university while living at home. This will allow you to have the university experience that so many people crave while also remaining frugal and ensuring that you have time to focus as many hours of the day possible on computer science instead of other silly liberal arts classes which waste your money and effort. You can get a job just taking computer science classes at university – I took eight CS classes at my hometown university (costing $8000), and because I studied Treehouse for free through my public library with the extra time I had not taking other classes in pursuit of B.S. degree (just two CS classes each semester), I was able to start working as a web developer.

Holm Schooling makes liberal use of open education. For each class I was enrolled in at university, I was sure to watch every open courseware class that was available online on the same topic. I studied far more than what was required on the syllabus, and made sure that I crammed as much studying (using open educational resources, Library Genesis, interlibrary loans, or my public library stacks) so that I could read as many textbooks on each subject that I took. All of this cost zero extra dollars. Open educational resources like open courseware gave me a semester’s worth of lectures many times over for each class. Library Genesis gave an unlimited supply of textbooks each semester without the overhead of applying for interlibrary loans and waiting for books to be delivered. My public library provided Treehouse and Lynda so that I could study web development during my winter and fall break so that I could study programming beyond what was available at university. Living at home for a majority of the time also meant that I could cook lentils and beans and peas for lunch each day, so that I never ate at the cafeteria and kept costs as low as possible. Holm Schooling means sticking with public universities – never going to private universities, which are a tremendous waste of money even with a scholarship and also don’t even particularly emphasize STEM anyway. Holm Schooling means at the extent that you’ve completely all the CS classes offered at your hometown university, you finish up your B.S. at University of the People for roughly a thousand dollars (while working your first programming job, with tuition reimbursement). Holm Schooling means using your public library for all the odds and ends regarding computer science that aren’t offered through your university or even open courseware and MOOCs. You have access to hundreds of programming books and possibly even thousands of programming video tutorials if your public library subscribes to Treehouse or Lynda. Holm Schooling means completing all the other classes that you are interested in for free via MOOCs or open courseware instead of paying for non-CS classes at university. Holm Schooling means using OER and library genesis to study topics above and beyond what are required on the syllabus. Holm Schooling even means that you can completely forgo the university altogether if there is not one available in your hometown, and use internet resources and your public library to supply your studies of computer science. With Library Genesis, every person has an academic library where they can borrow the latest and most important computer science books. The university library has been digitalized and is now available online through Library Genesis, reducing the need to physically enroll in a university. You can now study the same books that were previously only available in the university stacks now at home without even being a student. This is great, and soon things will be legitimized when you can subscribe to a Spotify for books for a monthly fee. We’re maybe a few years away from that. In the meantime, Library Genesis means that every person on Earth has a public university library at their disposal.

Holm Schooling means never buying the latest and greatest computers while you are still just a student. If you buy the cheapest desktop (a Raspberry Pi for $50) and an eight year-old, $100 laptop with Linux installed on it, you should be able to afford the minimum computing requirements for learning how to code. Once you get a job, you’ll be supplied a laptop through which you can pursue learning how to program more for zero equipment costs. Holm Schooling could even mean just using the public library’s computers, and using a cloud IDE to store and run your programs. Holm Schooling means that studying computer science should be accessible to every person in America, because the equipment requirements are as low as possible. You can often check out Raspberry Pi’s from your public library. You can check out a laptop there too. The public library has free internet. If you are paying for public university classes, you can use all the public computer labs instead of going into debt to pay for your own shiny laptop. Learning how to use Linux means you can use a much older laptop than is possible using other operating systems, plus you’ll learn how to use Linux which is often a requirement for programming jobs. Holm Schooling means acquiring nothing in your quest to learn how to program, and instead use every single piece of public equipment available at your means, whether as a public library patron, a public university student, or an employee at a job.

Now let’s discuss the edge cases. Let’s say you don’t have a community college or a public university in your hometown. Then the answer to the frugal Holm Schooler is obvious: study online! Enroll at the University of the People and visit all the open educational resources cataloged in our curriculum and its references at the bottom to design your own curriculum for computer science. Remember, the goal is not to acquire prestigious university degrees, it’s to get a good first job programming so that you can gain experience and even pump as much money as possible into your 401(K) while you’re young, all while making use of tuition reimbursement to fill the holes in your education that were required to maintain frugality in pursuit of your first programming job. Holm Schoolers aren’t afraid to be, well, home schooled in computer science. Home schooling is very possible through open education resources and open courseware, not including the free resources offered by your public library. Living at home and studying computer science for four years is a great way to start your career using as little cash as possible. A Holm Schooler would even question the need for public university in this day and age. Most computer science topics can be learned for free through the internet. Programming just requires a computer, which can be bought for $35 from Raspberry Pi. The tens of thousands of dollars required to attend public university could fund decades of Treehouse or PluralSight or Lynda. Why take liberal arts classes for a thousand dollars a pop in pursuit of a degree requirement when you could read the OER on the topic published by [openstax.org](http://www.openstax.org) and watch an open courseware too. Public university isn’t a requirement when it involves moving to a different city and paying for housing on top of tuition. You can pursue degrees in CS online through UoPeople. You can study through the internet. You can maintain your friends you made in high school instead of leaving them for a different city altogether. You can save enough money now that you aren’t in debt when you get your first programming job, so instead of paying off loans and their interest, you can maximize your 401K contributions and sock the rest of your earning money into Vanguard’s VTSAX index fund. The importance of frugality begs the question why only start being frugal after you graduate, why not be frugal in regards to the years 18-22? If you want to be 22 and not have tens of thousands of dollars of debt when you start your first programming job, then stick to free programming resources. Holm Schoolers know that they can learn anything they need to know for programming for roughly $200 a year plus the cost of internet. Holm Schoolers, instead of taking a $1000 intro to liberal arts class, used the time to study _HOW_ to study computer science for free on the internet. With that time investment learning about OER, Open Education, Open Source Licenses, Open Courseware, and public library subscriptions like Treehouse and Lynda, they learned everything they need to accomplish their goals in computer science for free. For the rest of their lives! By reading this blog and learning the basics of Holm Schooling, their time investment allows them to bypass the cost of higher education that isn’t already available in their hometown, and pursue their education for very low cost through the internet. Why spend tens of thousands of dollars getting a degree when you can spend roughly $200 a year for four years and still ending up with a paying job. After that, _then_ you pursue higher education while qualifying for tuition reimbursement through your employer.

Holm Schooling isn’t guaranteed to be successful – you’ll still have to study CS as hard as you can for four years straight and have the competency required for a job. But it will save you money in this day and age of tuition hell. Holm Schoolers realize that the university has been replaced through Library Genesis, Open Educational Resources, and Open Courseware. When faced with the question of whether to spend hundreds of dollars versus ten thousand dollars for a year of education in CS, Holm Schoolers will boot up their Raspberry Pi, do a google search for some nice github repsositories filled with links to good MOOCs and Open Coursewares, “borrow” some books from Library Genesis or else download some OER, and get started studying for free. Saving ten thousand dollars a year will allow them to avoid loans so that they can invest in index funds/VTSAX while in their twenties. If they live frugally and save 50-75% of their take home pay while maximizing their 401K and IRA contributions each year in their early twenties, they will be assuring their financial independence later in life as those investments gain compound interest instead of paying for loan interest. Holm Schoolers read voraciously about the FIRE movement and know that Holm Schooling is an appropriate tactic for financial independence/early retirement. The sooner a Holm Schooler learns about Holm Schooling, the sooner they’ll be prepared for a lifetime of self-directed learning for a mere $200 dollars a year. And since a Holm Schooler is saavy with financial independence, they’ll be investing in VTSAX early in life so that they can retire as soon as possible since they’ve lived so frugally for a decade more than their peers (even in regards to education). Holm Schooling means having more time to self-educate in the important stuff (computer science) since you’re not obligated to pay out the wazoo for silly liberal arts requirements in pursuit of a B.S. Holm Schooling means knowing that the university isn’t a requirement for success in 2018, and the role of the university in regards to computer science education will continue to decrease as more EdTech startups are invented and subscribed to by public libraries. Holm Schoolers put more trust into their local public library than they do private universities located across the country. And Holm Schoolers know that computer scientists will continue to invent technology that will allow for computer science to be studied for free on the internet by more and more people around the world. Their bets are placed squarely in this open source realm versus the realm of the brick and mortar university, with their bottom line that requires profits and proprietary licensing. To the Holm Schooler, the expensive brick and mortar university (after the invention of the internet and affordable computing) has as much chance for survival as telephone operators. Though some fun is to be had on traditional campuses, the costs for this fun are better spent on Vanguard Index Funds and an internet connection/raspberry pi and inexpensive home cooked vegan food with a bike. Social lives can and will survive outside of the university. People can and will live happy lives even if they don’t immediately leave their hometown at age 18 in pursuit of fame and a PhD. Going to the public university in your hometown can and will lead to quality education even if you don’t go to a private university on the coast. Frugality and extreme saving can and will lead to fulfilling lives even in the day and age of loans and debts and automobiles and shiny computers, paid for with credit cards.

Holm Schooling is an important part of FIRE. It’s an extension of FIRE to education. In the day and age of the internet, paying for expensive brick and mortar universities makes as much sense as buying expensive automobiles. Though infinitely attractive, the cost of the latter just doesn’t meet justification under scrutiny. Holm Schooling is a bicycle instead of a car. Holm Schooling is OER and a book from the public library instead of a used $150 textbook. Holm Schooling is University of the People even if you are smart enough to go to a private school. Holm Schooling is knowing that the benefits of an elite education are overblown, and exercising your frugality while young is a better benefit to the quality of your life than splurging on a degree. Holm Schooling knows that university is only four years, while Holm Schooling is self-education every year for the rest of your life. Do you think universities will teach you how to be self-sufficient regarding education? Do you think universities will teach you that everything they teach can be gleaned for free through the internet? Do you think universities will teach you that they operate under a deprecated and unnecessarily expensive model in the day and the age of internet EdTech? Will a university teach you how to learn without making use of university resources? Obviously no.

So start being frugal today and study computer science as inexpensively as possible through your public library. Holm Schoolers live a life of extreme savings (not debt), and as a result live in ways that ensure their prosperity through life. Universities make a killing off the false hopes that are offered to all that sign their contract. Holm Schoolers know that success is a result of hard work and intensive study of computer science, and not by purchasing a degree that promises you’re a competent computer scientist in exchange for tens of thousands of dollars. Holm Schoolers know that in the day and age where FIRE is readily researchable and guidelines for early retirement are written for free on the internet, that not being frugal with regards to age 18-22 is a wasted opportunity. Holm Schoolers decide to turn 22 not with a debt that cuts into their 401K savings for years, but to begin their first job maximizing their 401K and IRA and putting the leftovers into VTSAX. Because they went to their hometown public university and lived at home and cooked for themselves and only studied CS instead of moving away for a private university, they kept with the philosophy of 50-75% savings even during their college years. They still got a job, and they still have wonderful careers as self-taught computer scientists. Holm Schoolers are a saavy bunch, I highly suspect if you learn a bit more about their beliefs, you’ll come to appreciate their decisions too. 