---
date: "2019-01-14"
title: "Who Will Be The Khan Academy For Computer Science?"
ghissue: 18
---

There is a large dearth in the computer science edtech realm. There are very few nonprofits in the competition for computer science education. I think there is room for a service like Khan Academy that uses video tutorials and maybe some reading or OER to teach computer science to students who can track their points as they complete assignments.

Treehouse, PluralSight, and Lynda are all for-profits. MOOC providers like Coursera and Udacity are also for-profit. They cost quite a lot of money, relatively, and are hidden behind a paywall. What if there was an organization like Khan Academy for computer science? That is, an organization that used all the free public domain resources available on the internet to create a curriculum that is free for users. They could obviously receive donations, and I believe an organization that provided a thorough curriculum of CS would receive a lot of donations (just like Khan Academy does), and they could even pay their authors such as the way that OpenStax pays their textbook authors. I wish Khan Academy would step up their computer science curriculum, fully fleshing it out in such a way that it competes with Treehouse for thoroughness and effectiveness and broadness of topics, but Khan Academy is limited in that they try and have as few as possible people contribute modules to the curriculum. That’s a shame, and if Khan Academy were to just start a separate school that just taught CS principles, they could really provide a service to not only high schoolers but also college-aged students. I’m envisioning curriculum taught by professors, who teach rigorous computer science topics over a lengthy series of videos. Khan Academy could really excel in computer science because they already are so good at teaching science, and soon having a very good grasp of computer science will be required for every science discipline.

Basically what I’m after is a free version of Treehouse. If Treehouse were a nonprofit, they could produce videos (albeit at a slower rate) while relying on donations to cover their budget. The service that a free-for-anyone Treehouse would provide to the world would be beyond comparison. There would be very few people that wouldn’t at least learn how to program some easy programs in a language or two. Because it would be a nonprofit, instead of relying on unique Intellectual Property that they themselves created, and could outsource some classes by finding good OpenCourseWare. My qualifications for this nonprofit would be that they upload all their videos to YouTube, just like Khan Academy, because that ensures not only an archive but also the ability to easily watch for free.

I’ve stated before that I wish the University of People would conspire with public libraries to have the library cover the tuition for students, at a discount rate in return for buying in bulk. That way, public libraries across the nation could provide computer science degrees to their patrons for free. Unfortunately with UoPeople being $1000 a year, this is still too high of a charge (when comparatively Treehouse, which public libraries do subscribe to, costs $300 a year). I hope in the next few decades competitors to UoPeople will drive the cost of a CS degree even lower, to the point when public libraries can afford to pay. I am either dedicated to a nonprofit for general CS education, or public libraries paying for patron’s online degrees. Either would be an agreeable situation.

The only nonprofit in the CS education technology world is edX, yet their still hide their curriculum behind signups that you can’t just drop in and start in the same way that you can at Khan Academy. Nor is there any sort of curriculum that starts you from beginner and carries you to competency the way there is at Treehouse. If there was a nonprofit for teaching computer science, I’m sure myself and many others would contribute. I sort of see Holm School as having the potential to serve this role, but unless I quit my job and dedicate full time to coding a website for Holm School I don’t really have the time to carry out the FullStack duties, versus having a free Gatsby blog. Perhaps if people start reading this blog, I’ll have the incentive to try and expand beyond just a blog and create a site that tries to be Khan Academy for computer science. Unfortunately I am not a very good teacher, so I wouldn’t be the best person to create YouTube tutorials either. I’d much rather just create the website that enables a good teacher to create lessons.

I find it kind of bizarre there isn’t anyone that has created a nonprofit that teaches computer science online. I’m pretty sure the only foray into educational videos that code.org has undertaken is that series on the internet that’s on Khan Academy. Considering Code.org has the donors, it seems that they could expand beyond creating block-based tutorials for elementary school kids. But their focus is on training teachers. The closest thing I’ve seen to something like a nonprofit Treehouse is Google’s CSFirst, but that just covers Scratch and doesn’t expand beyond a brief introduction to coding. I’m talking about the equivalent to Treehouse, for free thanks to a nonprofit. Obviously that’s a huge undertaking, but I think the time is ripe for someone to combine OER with Treehouse-style video lessons to create a free resource for potential computer scientists. The success of Khan Academy was that all the technology needed to create the videos was a computer and a Wacom tablet. We need something like that for computer science that is available for free to everyone. When someone creates that, I know where I will be applying to work.

The curious thing is that we can’t even get OpenStax to create a intro to computer science textbook. What in the world could be more important than a free, comprehensive computer science textbook? I’m amazed they’re creating AP textbooks, yet they’re not creating a computer science or programming textbook. Obviously there are a lot of OER possibilities out there regarding programming textbooks, so there would be a lot of open source content for OpenStax to use. Perhaps if UoPeople were to make available the OER they use in their classes, there could be a freely available first-semester level textbook equivalent. Holm School’s curriculum is not anything like what you would learn in a college course, so I hope eventually there is a textbook that people can use in their self-study. I promote purchasing the $15 used ninth edition of Intro to Java Programming by Liang (Comprehensive Version), which can carry a year’s worth of CS topics and programming exercises for the cost of two lunches. But I wish there was something free and open source. Of course, this might be moot given the existence of Library Genesis, but I’m still a fan of OER solutions until there is a $15-a-month subscription service to every book ever written, a la Spotify for books. I think if everyone were to @ OpenStax and let them know you desired a computer science textbook, they would put it on their shortlist for future titles.

Of course, it could just be easier to promote a synthesis of OER and somewhat affordable learning platforms like PluralSight. Considering PluralSight is just $200 a year, it’s almost not worth the effort to compete with their catalog. Obviously it would be nice for teenagers who don’t have a job to have a nonprofit CS education course, but even a teenager can work a couple weeks after school to pay for a PluralSight account to use with their Raspberry Pi, or else have a parent pay for a Treehouse subscription or something. Considering PluralSight is $200 a year and Treehouse is $300, it might be better just to leave it to them to find ways of delivering quality education at a reasonable pricepoint. $16-25 a month for computer science-related curriculum sounds pretty reasonable to me. That’s why I promote combining Holm School’s OER-based curriculum with a subscription to one of these services. That’s a great way to boost your computer science knowledge, and the only limitation is your ability to find time to study. Since $16 a month for PluralSight could be earned with three hours of work at minimum wage, I think there would be ample time to learn even while working to pay the tuition costs. Even UoPeople’s expense can be paid through part-time work, even just over the summer. I think rather than formulating a new iteration of Khan Academy, teaching young people how to budget to study computer science is more valuable and that’s why I’m blogging here at Holm School. Holm Schooling, if you don’t go to a hometown public university and instead use the curriculum, lets you learn computer science and get a first job at a very low cost. With Stack Overflow, there is always someone who can answer your CS questions that a professor would usually answer. If you read the blog, the about page, and the curriculum, you will teach yourself how to learn CS for free, even without a Khan Academy dedicated to Computer Science. While I’d obviously welcome such an organization with open arms, I’m still confident that there are adequate services right this very moment for learning CS for free. Anyone is willing to help me in the development of my curriculum by contributing to Holm School’s github page. On a related note, I plan to create a nonprofit out of Holm School in the future once people start reading my blog and a community develops.
