---
date: "2019-01-18"
title: "Work Your Way Out of Your Public University Career Into A Programming Career"
ghissue: 19
---

Don't be afraid to work your way out of your status as a student of computer science. If you've read some of my blog posts, you'll know I recommend going to the public university if your hometown has one, while you live at home to say on rent. It's not exactly glamorous, but moving to a different city to attend university doesn't make much sense, because you aren't working so you can't afford it. If you don't have a public university in your hometown, attend University of the People. Of course, if you don't have a public or community college in your hometown, it will probably be less likely that they will have a lot of programming jobs, but that is something you'll have to determine and strategize yourself and your career prospects in your hometown.

If your hometown does have career prospects for programmers, there is no reason why you should extend your (unpaid) time as a computer science student, but instead implement a career path that will replace your status as a student as soon as feasibly possible. Take me for an example. I attended three semesters of public university in my hometown and only took computer science classes. Because my workload was lighter because I didn't have to take liberal arts courses for requirements, I was able to put more time into my computer science studies and read extra textbooks, did unassigned p-sets, and programmed a lot of extra topics through free services provided through my public library like Treehouse (and eventually Lynda). Because I accelerated my studies, I did well in my classes. In my third semester, someone from a local company came to recruit summer interns for their organization. Having done well in my classes and because I was studying web programming in my free time using Treehouse, I got an internship on the company's web team.

My boss on the web team purchased me a PluralSight account using company funds, in order that I could study Angular. This was very nice of him, and it helped me greatly after the summer in my networking class because PluralSight has quite a lot of CCNA material. Eventually I realized that what I was learning in PluralSight (free through my internship) and Treehouse (free through my public library) was more relevant to my career as a web developer than paying for university classes. I took a semester off to utilize my PluralSight account that I was receiving as a benefit of being a summer intern. However, because I was no longer a student, I applied for some jobs that seemed interesting and asked for knowledge about topics I had studied through Treehouse, and I got a full-time programming job at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. As an employee, I spent my free time after work continuing to study Treehouse and eventually just bought myself a PluralSight account for $200 a year. My job also offered tuition reimbursement, so I easily could have finished up my B.S. in computer science through UoPeople. But because I already had a liberal arts degree, with my accruing work experience I could have applied to Georgia Tech's OMSCS masters degree and have it only cost a couple of thousand dollars total. But Treehouse was free (and I'm always worried that my public library will stop subscribing, since I'm sure it's expensive for them, so I never squander the privilege of having a free account) and eventually worked my way to thirtieth place in Treehouse for points. Even though I only went to four semesters of college (totalling $8000), I have a good enough resume to get computer science jobs now that I got a job/experience instead of finishing a C.S. B.S.

I now have a job at the place where I did my internship, and in a year I will qualify for tuition reimbursement and this time around I am definitely not going to sleep on it and I will try for a OMSCS master's. I reached the place that benefits from internships outweighed the price of college tuition, so I stopped going to college, and the experience on my resume of having an internship got me a junior dev job. Having a junior dev job qualified me for tuition reimbursement, but having my free public library Lynda and Treehouse accounts kept me educated about web dev so that I could get another web development job. Now I again qualify for tuition reimbursement, and because I am interested in UoPeople and OMSCS the cost to continue studying will be very small after tuition reimbursement. In other words, just by working hard in my public university for a few semesters, I quickly earned my way out of having to pay tuition, and instead I'm now at the place where continuing my education is free.

You should aim to work your way out of your status as a student by earning internships that have rewards and benefits like PluralSight accounts that will provide a means of learning new programming topics. You should take what you learn from your internships and attempt to get a job as soon as possible, so that you don't have to keep paying tuition but can earn an income while qualifying for benefits like tuition reimbursement. You should use UoPeople and OMSCS to (slowly) earn your credentials while working hard at your job, also studying programming topics through cheap resources like Treehouse, Lynda, and PluralSight. You can keep the total cost to you low by trying to accelerate your education as quickly as possible by keeping costs low (such as using an old computer running linux or university resources) so that you don't have to work to cover bills, giving you more free time to study. If you only take CS courses, too, you'll have more time for programming. Work your way out of student status and into a career that will pay you to be a student on the side. If you do this at a public university in your hometown, you can keep total expenses very low (either by avoiding getting a full bachelors degree and all the side requirement classes, or by leaving college early to take up a job, or by working as an intern during the summer to pay your tuition). Use your public library's CS stack to boost your programming language knowledge so that you qualify for job requirements and get those internships. Your internships possibly will provide you will PluralSight accounts or something similar.

Becoming a computer scientist doesn't have to cost a lot. If you can't afford public university, you can try UoPeople or else use OER or Library Genesis combined with OpenCourseWare and your public library CS stack. Knowing how to program will earn you internships, which will earn you jobs. Many programming jobs have benefits like tuition reimbursement, which will allow you to earn your degrees in your freetime for a fraction of the cost of even your public university if you use UoPeople and OMSCS. It is important that you view university not as a task (a bachelor's degree), but something optional that only serves to get your foot in the door of the industry, so that you can replace what you learn at university with job experience and educational benefits provided by the employer. Don't think you have to earn a master's degree in CS before you get a job. You can keep your time in university down to a matter of a couple years if you fully utilize all the free resources available on the internet for CS education, as demonstrated by this site's OER curriculum. Don't be fooled into thinking you can't afford to become a computer scientist. If you study CS, even just at your public library, you will find people will happily pay you to continue studying CS, taking the cards of unaffordable tuition off the table completely. Turn an expense into an earning, as quickly as possible, so that you can leave the university early and stop paying those ridiculous tuition prices.

My point in talking about this isn't to say that if you are still in school you aren't working hard enough or something like that. All I'm saying is the educational benefits you can find in the workplace are often more relevant to your career and programming skill requirements than what you learn in university. So, earning those benefits from your employment often promotes your career even more than being in university. So the sooner you gain educational benefits from employment instead of university, the sooner you can not only learn more important and relevant things, but you can also continue your university studies online for cheap at the same time you're learning stuff related to your job. Make the jump into the workforce as soon as possible if you're a university student. You might just find that you learn more on the job and through educational benefits than what you learn in the university classroom. At which point university, after a couple of years on the job, seems all together unappealing for spending your time and money. When you can learn quite a lot through PluralSight, which can be provided through your job as a benefit, or through Lynda or Treehouse, which can be provided through your public library, relying on university with it's $1000+ per course fees seems passe and quaint, at best. It's truly a different age, and I found the quicker I entered the workforce, the happier I was regarding my computer science education (after I learned how to program in my university program the first two years -- after that I could self-educate online).
