---
date: "2019-05-30"
title: "You Deserve to Go to College For Free"
ghissue: 78
---

I was on the back porch thinking about how I was going to spend my Memorial Day. I first wanted to study PluralSight and .NET Core, then I wanted to go through college level math classes, then I wanted to conquer the Khan Academy curriculum, then I wanted to study MIT CS OpenCourseWare. My quest to make up for getting a liberal arts degree and study college level science is motivating but I'm having difficulty knowing where to start and it's a tad frustrating. But one thing struck me as I thought: You (the reader) Deserve to Go to College For Free.

I thought about my own life and how it took a turn for the worst when I decided not to go to the college that gave me a full ride scholarship and instead went with the more prestigious school that still gave me a "decent" scholarship. Instead of graduating from college with no debt from a state school, I decided to go to a private liberal arts college and graduate with $60,000+ in debt. What a horrible mistake that was. I even ended up going to that school that gave me a scholarship for summer classes and a year too, of course on no scholarship since I transferred, so the opportunity was completely a wash. While attending that state school, I wanted to pursue electrical engineering instead of the art history I was studying at the liberal arts college (the liberal arts college didn't have a computer science department). I didn't get into the EE department, though, since as a transfer who was deciding on what to pursue in the new flush options for science I had at a state school, I missed the deadline to apply. What a shame, being in the EECS department would have been quite an opportunity. Instead I studied music, which kicked off many years of studying Max/MSP, so at least I was coding in my music and studio art classes from that point on, which led me to eventually go back to college to study CS.

But I saw that indeed, I had wasted my opportunity to attend KU free and study a hard science, instead I attended a private college and studied the humanities. What a shame, because the first option would have prepared me very well for a career as a programmer while the latter option set me up for a career at Chipotle's, plus $60,000 debt. What in the world was I thinking?

But then I realized a few things. Probably if you want to be a programmer, you're a capable scientist who at the age of 18 is capable of scoring scholarships to local and state public universities. I think the college you choose should be made according to which one is the cheapest, and whether that cheapness will leave you with debt when you graduate. As computer scientists, I think you should work as hard as you can in high school studying SAT prep and taking AP classes, especially getting a National Merit Scholarship award, so that you can get a full ride scholarship to your state and local public university. The benefits are immense, especially if you study computer science.

College attendance is kind of like index funds and long-term investing. You want to go with the mutual fund with the lowest expense ratio. This expense ratio should be as lean as possible, and that's why most of us choose Vanguard. Vanguard has a .04% ER, whereas my TIAA-CREF account had a .3% ER for a S&P500 index. And of course, active accounts had something like .7-.9% ER. I think of private universities kind of like active mutual funds. They siphon off a significant amount of your profits, all while you assume all the risk and expenses. My private liberal arts education was like a 1.5% ER mutual fund, where my full ride scholarship was like Vanguard VTSAX. Of course, I was trying to outperform the market, and as we all know trying to outperform the market over long term actually returns smaller gains than if you had matched the market in an index fund. I wasn't buying and holding with a full ride, I was day trading with a liberal arts degree. What naivity I had! Chasing prestige was like chasing Past Performance as an indicator of future returns: Past Performance is meaningless and useless as an indicator of future returns! No wonder I got burnt, because I was gambling against the odds. The mutual fund company (the private liberal arts college) made a healthy profit at my expense while I experienced greatly diminished returns versus the market. Debt when young is a powerful force that works against you, and I took on quite a large sum trying to outperform.

I think preparation for college needs to be seen as sort of index investing: you live frugally to earn capital (i.e. studying for PSAT, SAT, AP classes, and class rank) and in return you earn a match of the market (a full ride scholarship to a state school). With zero debt, you can enter the workforce able to max out your 401k and IRA when young in order to gain compound interest for 35+ years. If you follow the active trading route, and go to a private liberal arts university (the enormous tuition is more like a higher ER), you probably won't even gain as much as what you would accomplish at the state school which you could have gone to for free. That's because $60,000 debt at age 22 is equivalent to $1.6 million dollars of lost earnings by age 60 had you invested that in a 401k and IRA with total market index funds instead.

You should always go for the cheapest university, no matter what the "prestige" of the university. College-level education is mostly self-education anyway, and there are diminishing returns on paying more for what accounts to an roughly equal product. Since you can download any science book ever published on Library Genesis, the quality of the library, for example, doesn't matter. We're now entering the weirdly utopian world that what qualifies as college-level resources for studying is mostly equal to all students in America. Chasing prestige is like trying to beat the market: In the long term, it's your lose of profit while the universities siphon off a third up to a half of your profits.

A lot of self consciousness might be the result of wanting to become a computer scientist. Students might think they don't deserve a full ride scholarship, and so they sign up for debt at a more expensive private university. I'm not sure. But you deserve to go to the college for free. If you're in high school, since college is mostly for 18-23 year olds, you should try to earn as many scholarships as you can. For older adults maybe looking for a career change or who never attended college, you should study online, a [$5200 F-You Degree](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree), or else selectively (CS only) at an affordable public university in your hometown. You should always go with what costs the smallest amount of money. There is no diminishing of quality when you choose affordability, online education is quite good in this day and age. Budget college might mean you don't even sign up for college, and just go to your public library to study their CS stack, mixed with online OER and OCW. But you should always choose the option that leaves you with the smallest bill.

You deserve to go to college for free, it is not a fluke. Anyone can budget their self education around a mix of brick-and-mortar and online education in order to maximize their education while keeping debt as low as humanly possible. Even if this means leaving your CS department early, only taking CS classes with no goal of earning a degree, or attending UoPeople and working 4 hours a week to pay the tuition cost.

Lot of hype surrounds college, and it's a powerful force that compells people who studied hard in high school to go deep in debt. Most people smart enough to get into a competitive private university are smart enough to pay debt off relatively quickly once they start their career. But that's not always the case, and getting left with nonbankruptable debt in the tens of thousands of dollars (these days its more like hundreds of thousands of dollars...) can truly impact your savings for retirement. In my opinion and experience, take the full ride scholarship even if it's to a less prestigious school. Prestige won't hold your hand once you get into the real world, and just because you don't have an expensive degree doesn't mean that you won't succeed as a programmer. Any shortcoming in your affordable/free university's CS curriculum and syllabi can be ameliorated with online OER and OCW, if not just YouTube. It's not even an honor to have graduated from a private university, you just kind of feel like a sucker when the degree doesn't result in any financial benefit but saddles you with debt. Buyer's remorse is something you won't have if you Holm School. There's a certain giddiness that comes from being frugal when you're young, in a way that mixed with responsible investing in vehicles like index funds, can set you up for a life of early retirement, general leisure, or even philanthropy.

You deserve to go to college for free. At the bare minimum, Holm School and other digital curricula like it (i.e. [functionalCS](https://functionalcs.github.io/curriculum/) or [teachyourselfcs.com](https://teachyourselfcs.com)), when mixed with Library Genesis, can leave you debt-free at 22 and employed, ready to hit up your Vanguard IRA plus your 401k to earn those 3200% 35+ year compounding returns. Don't squander the most opportune period of your life saddled with student loans. It's a risk and bad strategy. Go to college, whether real world or a digital 'unschool', for free.