---
date: "2018-10-11"
title: "How You Can Be Sure Your Public Library Will Pay For Your College Education In The Future"
---

Take this for an example: You're watching TV, and an actor pops up. You hear that the actor was born in Michigan. You're from Michigan, so you are curious exactly where the actor was born. So you bring out your cell phone or tablet, google the actor, and look at their Wikipedia Information. Finding the city, you return to focusing on the TV.

Here's what you didn't do: You didn't write down the actors name, but the piece of paper by your car keys as a reminder, after work drive to the public library, and go to the reference section and get an encyclopedia to look up their biography. This method of research is done. Very few reasons exist why you would spend the gas to drive to the library, take the energy to walk to the reference section from the parking lot, and return to you car and drive home. You just google it on your tablet.

Now, what do you think the implications of people using Wikipedia instead of Wikipedia are to the public library and their bottom line? Well, your public library doesn't have to spend so much money on reference material like encyclopedias about actors. They don't have to expend the space in their limited library to house books. They can cut their expenditures and replace biographies with other books they feel will be more useful for patrons. The usefulness of Google basically eliminates much of the former obligations of a library to serve Google's now functionality.

If the public library as a research utility has been in some ways replaced by internet services, what is the library going to do with the money they are saving? Well, take computer science books for example: Instead of keeping up with the latest books about new programming languages in their stack by purchasing new books each year, they can relax their feelings of obligations to keeping up with new CS books and instead put some of the money towards online educational services like Treehouse or Lynda. Books were expensive formerly, and even though these new online educational services take up the expense that they're saving by not purchasing new CS books, they are able to fit it within budget and provide a new online educational service that provides the same services as those books formerly did, only now it's online and more easily accessible (to patrons, who can just log in at home and start their learning) while also covering the latest programming languages and frameworks. Video tutorials are also very different than book learning (I would say better, especially for coding where you're required to view a lot of text on the screen), so the patrons get a better service for the same amount of money that the books formerly cost the public library. These educational services directly compete with the cost of higher education.

Treehouse is a good supplement to computer science classes at college. You can learn basic programming languages very well at Lynda. Both of these services are free for library patrons. Why would you pay tens of thousands of dollars for college when your public library offers a comparable educational experience for free? That's not even counting the free open educational services like Open CourseWare or OER that you can find on the internet, forever free and forever open source.

Then take for example the fact that online college degrees are increasingly becoming cheaper and cheaper (not in-person courses, but just online classes). UofPeople is $4000 and Georgia Tech OMSCS is $7000. What happens when colleges compete and use new internet technology to provide a college degree for the same cost as Treehouse? If the public library is willing to pay for Treehouse, they will probably be willing to pay for the affordable and accredited college degree. Compounding this will be the fact that online resources that are invented will cause the public library to have to pay less and less money for sufficient books to cover basic research. They'll have more money in their bottom line to pay for things like inexpensive online college degrees. Eventually we'll cross a threshold where online education that is accredited is as inexpensive as online educational services like Treehouse or Lynda, effectively making the public library the provider of a free college education.

This is inevitable. UofPeople is only nine years old and Treehouse is only 7 years old. Inexpensive online education is a new technology that relies on video and OER. As free services bring down the cost of hosting video (it's already free on YouTube thanks to Google) and OER continues to be written by more and more authors, the ubiquity of inexpensive online education services will grow. With more options for the public library's computer science expenditures, with less traditional obligations to outdated resources like paper books, the public library will be able to afford (accredited) equivalents of college education.

Treehouse already believes their resources provide the equivalent of a college degree. If public libraries already are subscribing to Treehouse, what's to say that the online educational resources provided by the public library won't continue to expand as the expense for these services decrease more and more each year?

So the question is, how long will it take for the budget of public library's computer science section to cover a fully accredited online college degree? My guess is ten years. If you can't hold on for that long, perhaps you want to write a few letters to your public library expounding on the importance of subscribing to inexpensive online educational services like Treehouse and Lynda. That way it won't be an all or nothing wait, but you can take advantage of the current technology for online learning that many public libraries are willing to pay for. Perhaps you can even use OER to fill in the educational gaps. Perhaps online education will truly be free (with accreditation), or perhaps you can feel confident to be self taught and use the public library and internet's free resources to learn computer science. I will tell you this, technology is continuously improving and hedging tens of thousands of dollars for a college degree now might not be the wisest bet given the resources that are available now through your public library. In my opinion, accredited college degrees in computer science will eventually be free, with the tuition covered by your public library. If you are impoverished, the public library will make sure that you have the resources to become a computer scientist. Be sure to thank them if they are already coming through, or prod them to switch to subscribing to online educational resources if they currently do not.

Inexpensive public universities and community colleges are still a very good option for impoverished computer scientists, but if you keep track of the quality and number of free services provided by public libraries versus the increasing cost of public colleges, you will come to the conclusion that studying at the library increasingly provides a way to potentially save tens of thousands of dollars and avoid the hassle of having to drive to school (such as the way you once had to drive to the public library to find biographical information of an actor), plus pay tuition! At least the public library was always free. The savings stand to be immense. Insist on being educated for free and your frugality will pay off with immense savings that you can budget your bottomline with. Computer Science education can, should, and will be free in the future. I would say it currently is if you use open educational resources while supplementing with your public library's resources. This trend will only increase and accelerate.

Do you use google instead of driving to the public library when you need a question answered? If you answered "yes," you will be sure that you will use your public library's online educational resources instead of a brick and mortar college to provide your education in the future, too. Just wait for it, and plan accordingly.