---
date: "2019-05-25"
title: "Why Youth is the Most Important Time to Avoid Debt, And That Includes Student Loans"
ghissue: 73
---

Part of the digital Renaissance happening right now is that there is a complete inversion of the traditional rules with which most baby boomers grew up. What a world that you can teach yourself to be a programmer for $300 a year: PluralSight, Treehouse, Lynda. What a world that you can earn a computer science degree from UoPeople for $4000 total. And the rules have changed for other aspects of learning. Instead of teaching being a thankless, underpaid job, being a digital educator can net you millions of dollars. PluralSight's Scott Allen makes roughly a million dollars a year, because their proprietary platform enables thousands of concurrent students instead of just a classroom of learners, and so PluralSight's monetization rules enable Scott Allen to earn commissions of a million dollars. Sal Khan, rather than just teaching his immediate family in the hours after work, put his videos on YouTube and kicked off one of the largest free educational technology nonprofits in the world (Khan makes more than $300,000 a year). To not be on the cutting edge of educational technology is a grave disaster, because you basically put your financial future in jeopardy praying that the old rules appply (i.e. the prestige of a private university or the prestige of a tenure track position at a research university), but if you ignore all these crazy, radical new rules you're going to be missing out on some tremendous gains and advantages. I myself am concerned with outreach, so instead of volunteering to teach a handful of students at the public library or Boys and Girls club after school, like I want to do, I am instead focusing on an open source Github repository for the source of my efforts. Hopefully instead of reaching 20 kids, I can reach thousands. Those are high hopes, obviously, and I'm starting small digitally as well, but those are the possibility enables by the internet and digital technology like ipads and iphones.

Some of the rules around investing have changed too. Instead of putting your money in stocks, it is now common wisdom among the financial independence crowd to put your savings into index funds. This is relatively new theory, and index funds were marginal even ten or twenty years ago. It's quite unique to be alive at the time of a Renaissance, and concurrent with the Renaissance in digital education is the Renaissance in investing that comes along with modern personal finance blogs like [Mr. Money Mustache](https://www.mrmoneymustache.com) aimed at computer scientists. If you follow the investment strategy of maxing out your 401k and IRA since the inception of your working life, having a savings rate of 50-70%, it's very easy to become a millionaire on a programmer's salary by the time you retire. In fact, just ten years of maxing out your IRA and 401k from ages 22-32 will result in your having more than 2 million dollars in your retirement account on just those ten years of savings alone (if you invest in total stock market index funds). The leverage you earn just by making really good choices in those ten years of your early working career can enable even zany ideas like early retirement. Financial independence is not hard, it's actually quite easy. The ongoing discussion around index fund investing is disseminating modern investment strategies on blog and podcasts on the internet, and to be unaware and uninterested in the latest developments is risking large amounts of "free" money earned through compounding for many decades.

Because your early life is a critical time period for financial security in later life, it is very important that you are very discerning when it comes to what you pay for in those years after graduating high school. Spending money on "investments" like private liberal arts college need to be analyzed extremely critically, especially since recent history has shown that the bloated cost of private tuition actually results in very low returns on investment. Many time you'll hear that college increases your earnings by $1 million over the course of your lifetime. What isn't said is that having a debt of $60,000 dollars at age 22 actually results in you paying your debt instead of socking the equivalent amount of money into index funds in tax-deferred IRAs and 401(k)s. If you invested $60,000 over the course of two years from age 22-24, instead of using that same amount to pay off debt, the compounding for 36 years from age 24-60 earns roughly $1.8 million dollars at 10% interest rate. So while you supposedly make a million more from having a college degree, if that college degree costs tens of thousands of dollars, you're sacrificing more than a million dollars too due to student debt during those critical early years.

Compounding interest is one of the most powerful mathematical concepts, which you can either use to your advantage by getting a college degree for zero cost, or it can be made your enemy by saddling you with non-bankruptable debt at the early stages of your career where earning potentials are their lowest. That's why college campuses are like mini feudal fiefdoms with castles. They are earning those fat compounding gains secured by investing at the age of 22, instead of you! You should put yourself in the estate's role, and find strategies to graduate from college debt free so that you can immediately max out your 401k and IRA each year upon starting your career. The simplest way is to go to your local public university in your hometown. The second easiest way is doing something equivalent to the [F-You Degree](https://holm.school/the-f-you-degree). The third easiest way is to study online for free using the [Holm School Curriculum](https://github.com/HolmSchool/HolmSchool) or at your public library. You can combine these tactics into modified strategies, such as taking as many CS classes as you can at your hometown public university, then finishing up your degree at UoPeople with transfer credits, and using your public library's Lynda subscription to supplement your studies rather than paying for Treehouse or PluralSight. The possibilities are endless, and the strategy needs to be crafted by learning Open Educational skills and study techniques, then combining them with the cheapest form of "college," whether that be just-CS-and-Math classes or whether that be UoPeople. What's most important is that goal of going to college for not more than what can be paid for working 5 or less hours a week at a minimum wage job. You want to be studying CS instead of working at a minimum wage job, especially because the return on investment is so high when learning to program affordably, so the tactic that minimizes the amount of necessary work in order to pay tuition so that you can graduate debt free is the best. This seems simple, and I'm not trying to be reductive. But many kids think that the expense of a degree signifies its quality, and therefore the most amount of work necessary to pay of your student debt is the best return on investment. Because we know about the opportunity cost of paying off debt instead of investing in index funds while you're young, we know this to be false.

Sometimes you may need your local public university as a sort of "booster" to your self-study "rockets." Obviously learning programming from scratch is most difficult at the beginning. By taking some intro to programming classes at university, you can learn the basics of programming so that you eventually reach the point that you are self-sustainable. At that point you can switch off the boosters, stop paying for university classes, and continue your study of CS online using OpenCourseWare and OER. You'll learn that once you can program the basics like data structures, that most advanced topics don't require in-person tutelage and that electronic educational resources are sufficient for your self study. As long as you're competent to pass your interview better than anyone else, you can break into a programming job without a degree. Fortunately the reward of studying affordably doubles up as you can "afford" more time to study. Instead of working, for example, because you don't have any costs, you can continue to study wherein if you were at university you would have to work at a job. Obviously the best situation would be to earn a programming internship while you're still studying. Then your time would be both studying and earning. Some internships might also cover the cost of your education.


Investing young is like free money. $10,000 invested in the S&P500 in 1980 would be worth $760,000 today. The irony of that statement is that that lifetime is the equivalent of a 22 year old investing that first year of employment, and in 2019 is the age of retirement. That should just exemplify how much college really costs. Paying $10,000 of student loans in 1980 would have "cost" you $760,000 today. That's the opportunity tradeoff that student loans force. It's amazing that in America we have set up a system that permits these financial burdens to almost inevitably and unavoidably foisted upon our youth. Just like feudalism was otherthrown with modern economic capitalism, so too the feudalism of mandatory college degrees will be otherthrown by the free market capitalism of online, open source educational technology. It will happen whether you pursue the new advances or not. What would be a shame is the opportunity cost of not pursuing the new economic system. You're throwing, quite literally, millions of dollars out the window by not pursuing the educational benefits available at just your public library and on github. 
 
The ability to graduate debt-free is a little miracle if you act appropriately and invest the equivalent money saved into a tax-deferred index fund-based savings account. It's almost like winning the lottery at the ripe old age of 60. Who wouldn't want to win the lottery at age 60? The question is, though, whether you can truly afford the "lottery mindset" that suggests by spending recklessly on "investments" with negative returns (like private liberal arts degrees), you'll strike it rich and score a multitudes-more successful career. Put the trust of your success in life on your individual skills, including the ability to self study online using free and open source educational resources with your sheer hard work and focused attention and effort, and you'll find yourself retiring successfully with very little investment (just a few years of a max-out 401k and IRA) once you begin your career as a programmer. By being suckered into an expensive, unaffordable, non-hometown college degree, you're making things much more difficult than what those shiny admission pamphlettes want you to believe.

The Educational Renaissance happening right now is that university-level training can be learned online for just a few hundreds of dollars a year, if not less. With free OER books and free OpenCourseWare classes, anyone can become a computer scientist for free. The only hindrance to your success is your own individual effort. The myth that you need an expensive degree to be successful in life can be counteracted by spending a few minutes with a compound interest calculator. You'll discover that youth is the most important time to avoid debt, and yes that even applies to student loans. Fortunately, there's no longer a Catch-22 that you need money to afford education, and you need education to earn money. Educational resources that are free are ubiquitous and prolific. Public libraries subscribe to digital resources on top of the sheer amount of free resources available on the internet. There are so many sources of learning that's it's almost impossible not to feel overwhelmed at the sheer amount of free tutorials and educational videos I have access to. While college isn't competitively priced, it would be foolish to turn my back on these inexpensive wells of knowledge and spend real money just for the sacred cow of tradition, "that's the way its always been done," and ritualistic formalism.

Fortunately for you a Renaissance is not a revolution. These choices of exercising frugality even while college age are not mandatory for every American. It's a choice, but one that I promote and educate about on this blog in hopes that you too can discover its benefits, in much the same way that my life has been aided by these resources plus my local public library. Everyone benefits from a Renaissance and the resulting scientific revolution that follows. Mr. Money Mustache and JL Collins's ["The Simple Path to Wealth"](https://jlcollinsnh.com/stock-series/) have both been instrumental in getting me back on my feet after a disappointing twenties where I wasn't able to save. While I might not retire early, I no longer will be making investing mistakes like not investing in total market index funds and not maxing out my 401k and IRA. I will have a comfortable retirement now. I'm very happy that my Treehouse account that I get for free through my public library resulted in me learning about Mr. Money Mustache, from whom I learned about JL Collins. It's been a chain of successes that include me securing my career for just the cost of a handful of classes at my local public university. Now that I have a job, I can earn a master's through Georgia Tech's OMSCS degree for free thanks to tuition reimbursement. I'm locked in to a successful career thanks to my public library and open educational resources.

While I myself am not young, if I had been young I would have built for myself, at a debt-free level, a guarantee for a very successful retirement. Maxing out your 401k and IRA while young and living frugally is a ticket into a painless retirement. Not saddling yourself with student debt as a result of "lottery mindset" surrounding the hoopla of college degrees and their supposed valuation of millions of dollars, when free open source educational resources exist and are ubiquitous surrounding programming and computer science, is a great means of achieving financial independence early in life. Being a programmer for your career permits you to benefit from the huge success of open source as a movement. Open source educational resources are prolific in the computer sciences, and they're all available free online for one-click downloading. Raspberry Pis allow you the hardware necessary to learn to program for $35. It's a cultural mindshift regarding education that needs to be talked about and pursued. Thank you for reading Holm School, I hope I am convincing you that programming is a great means of saving money while you're young.

